---
id: 24
url: https://pithlessly.github.io/1ml-intro
title: '1ML for non-specialists: introduction — Christine''s World Wide Web Site'
domain: pithlessly.github.io
source_date: '2026-01-09'
tags:
- compilers
- tutorial
- academic-paper
- haskell
summary: This article is an introductory guide to 1ML, a type system designed by Andreas
  Rossberg for integrating ML-style module systems into programming languages. The
  author aims to demystify 1ML's technical papers for compiler authors by explaining
  how 1ML functions as syntactic sugar for System Fω (the core type system of Haskell)
  and walking through its key concepts, including the type system architecture, record
  field handling, and semantic types. The series is designed as a companion to Rossberg's
  2018 paper and assumes readers have familiarity with type system notation, ML modules,
  and Fω, with the goal of enabling them to understand 1ML's inference rules and implementation
  details.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# 1ML for non-specialists: introduction — Christine's World Wide Web Site

@pithlessly · github · λ 1ML for non-specialists: introduction Date: 2023-12-25 Last updated: 2025-12-28 This is the first entry in what I intend as a multi-part series. 1ML is a type system designed by Andreas Rossberg and described in a collection of papers by him. When it comes to integrating an ML-style module system into a new language, I think 1ML currently provides the best overall story (although it’s not perfect). Unfortunately, Rossberg’s papers are pretty technical. He is a good writer, but I feel that right now there is still a communication barrier between academics who are in a position to discuss 1ML in depth and people who are in a position to write new compilers. I see a lot more discussion online that merely references 1ML than I do discussion that seems to deeply understand it. I’ve been studying 1ML for the last several months, and working on my own prototype implementation (which unfortunately isn’t yet in a publishable state). In an effort to help these ideas percolate down towards mainstream adoption, I want to help demystify some things that I found confusing. This series will not substitute for reading the paper, but I hope it can be a useful companion. I’ll be working from the version of the paper published in the Journal of Functional Programming in 2018. It’ll be very helpful to be able to look at that paper as you read this. In fact, you can press this button to pull it up on the side in this page: Open (It probably doesn’t look great on mobile, unfortunately.) Prerequisite knowledge In writing this, I assume the reader: Has some familiarity with inference rule notation and how type systems are defined using a combination of grammars and inference rules. Has some familiarity with the module system of OCaml or Standard ML, from a user’s perspective (not necessarily knowing their internals). Has familiarity with 1ML’s design goals as outlined in the paper introduction . Has not necessarily read the prequel, F-ing modules , Rossberg’s earlier paper on compiling module calculi to F ω . Goals By the end of this series of articles, the reader will have the tools they need to understand every single inference rule, including those of the type inference algorithm described in Section 7 . I also want to discuss some implementation concerns that are not mentioned in the paper (such as how to integrate type inference with levels). Non-goals A decent portion of the paper is dedicated to meta-theory (e.g. the proofs that the type system is sound, etc.). I have not read these sections in depth, and will not be discussing them here. It is reasonable for compiler authors to take these results as given and not focus on their details. In some places, I will be criticizing the way the paper presents its ideas. Please do not take these as prescriptions for how it should have been written. I do not have the standing to make prescriptions like that; the paper was written with considerations other than the ones most important to me (such as brevity of the rules, ease of meta-theory, & an intended audience of other academics). System F ω and the architecture of the type system At a basic level, 1ML is really just a sophisticated syntactic sugar for a version of the lambda calculus called System F ω . If you’re not familiar, this is basically the core type system of Haskell, including higher-kinded type constructors, with all polymorphism being explicit. 1ML terms (I’ll use term and expression interchangeably) are converted into F ω terms and 1ML types are converted into F ω types. The specific structure of this translation is best saved for a later article. For now, I’ll say that whenever a type T T T appears in the surface syntax, it is immediately converted to a F ω type written with the variable Ξ \Xi Ξ . After this translation, the rules completely forget about T T T and don’t touch it again. This is why we see similar constructs written with two different syntaxes, like (= type T ) \text{(= \textbf{type} $T$)} (= type T ) and [ = τ ] [= \tau] [ = τ ] . This may seem a little unfamiliar; I was used to seeing type systems that don’t distinguish between the surface syntax for types and the internal representation of types. But of course, a routine like this exists in any real-world type checker, it’s just that many papers would consider it “out of scope” and not discuss it. Technical note: order of record fields Whenever a type system defines a class of objects C C C , it will often come with some invariants (“every c ∈ C c \in C c ∈ C has property P P P ”) and some equivalences (“any c , c ′ ∈ C c, c' \in C c , c ′ ∈ C are equivalent if Q Q Q , even if they aren’t the same as written”). In situations like this, it is useful to pay attention to which properties and equivalences are being enforced through the grammar of C C C , and which are defined using the inference rules. Unfortunately, when it comes to how F ω ’s record field labels work, the paper isn’t so clear. Fig. 3 , which defines the syntax of F ω , has only this to say: τ : : = ⋯ ∣ { l : τ ‾ } e : : = ⋯ ∣ { l = e ‾ } \tau ::= \dots \mid \{ \overline{ l : \tau } \} \qquad e ::= \dots \mid \{ \overline{ l = e } \} τ ::= ⋯ ∣ { l : τ } e ::= ⋯ ∣ { l = e } (See below for an explanation of the overline notation.) However, Fig. 4 , which provides typing rules, has this rule for typing field access: Γ ⊢ e : { l : τ , l ′ : τ ′ ‾ } Γ ⊢ e . l : τ \frac{ \Gamma \vdash e : \{ l : \tau, \overline{ l' : \tau' } \} }{ \Gamma \vdash e.l : \tau } Γ ⊢ e . l : τ Γ ⊢ e : { l : τ , l ′ : τ ′ } ​ This rule only makes sense if we understand record fields to be intrinsically unordered. I think we can also reasonably assume that l ‾ \overline{ l } l is understood to contain no duplicates. That resolves our question; however, for reasons I’ll get into later, I suspect a type checker will want to keep around the original order of field labels in practice. I want to linger on the type system of F ω for a bit longer. We can think of F ω type expressions τ \tau τ as terms in a simply-typed lambda calculus whose base “type” is Ω \Omega Ω , the kind of types. This is the core of what gives F ω , and therefore 1ML, its power — type checking can invoke some form of computation at the type level. This power comes with a corresponding burden for the implementer, who must essentially build an interpreter for STLC into their type checker. The key rule is this one: Γ ⊢ e : τ ′ τ ′ ≡ τ Γ ⊢ τ : Ω Γ ⊢ e : τ \frac{ \Gamma \vdash e : \tau' \qquad \tau' \equiv \tau \qquad \Gamma \vdash \tau : \Omega }{ \Gamma \vdash e : \tau } Γ ⊢ e : τ Γ ⊢ e : τ ′ τ ′ ≡ τ Γ ⊢ τ : Ω ​ In words: “whenever an F ω term e e e is considered to have a type τ ′ \tau' τ ′ , we could also consider it to have type τ \tau τ if τ \tau τ is another well-formed type which is equivalent to τ ′ \tau' τ ′ .” The type equivalence rules are presented as two-directional equalities ( ≡ \equiv ≡ ), but in practice, a compiler will want to think of these as one-directional reductions. You can use a technique like normalization by evaluation for this. Bringing types all the way to normal form whenever you construct them is a viable approach, but it gets slow for very large types; there are standard techniques available for being lazier (this is not 1ML-specific). Semantic types and modeling them in code Figure 6 defines the grammar for semantic types. It’s important, so I’ll reproduce it here. (abstracted) Ξ : : = ∃ α ‾ . Σ (large) Σ : : = π ∣ bool ∣ [ = Ξ ] ∣ { l : Σ ‾ } ∣ ∀ α ‾ . Σ → η Ξ (small) σ : : = π ∣ bool ∣ [ = σ ] ∣ { l : σ ‾ } ∣ σ → I σ (paths) π : : = α ∣ π σ ‾ (purity) η : : = P ∣ I \begin{align*} \text{(abstracted)} \quad && \Xi \quad & ::= \quad \exists \overline\alpha. \Sigma \\ \text{(large)} \quad && \Sigma \quad & ::= \quad \pi \mid \text{bool} \mid [= \Xi] \mid \{ \overline{ l : \Sigma } \} \mid \forall \overline\alpha. \Sigma \to_\eta \Xi \\ \text{(small)} \quad && \sigma \quad & ::= \quad \pi \mid \text{bool} \mid [= \sigma] \mid \{ \overline{ l : \sigma } \} \mid \sigma \to_{\texttt{I}} \sigma \\ \text{(paths)} \quad && \pi \quad & ::= \quad \alpha \mid \pi \overline\sigma \\ \text{(purity)} \quad && \eta \quad & ::= \quad \texttt{P} \mid \texttt{I} \end{align*} (abstracted) (large) (small) (paths) (purity) ​ ​ Ξ Σ σ π η ​ ::= ∃ α .Σ ::= π ∣ bool ∣ [ = Ξ ] ∣ { l : Σ } ∣ ∀ α .Σ → η ​ Ξ ::= π ∣ bool ∣ [ = σ ] ∣ { l : σ } ∣ σ → I ​ σ ::= α ∣ π σ ::= P ∣ I ​ Note: the meaning of overline notation, as in l : Σ ‾ \overline{l : \Sigma} l : Σ This is meta-theoretic syntax that just means “zero or more” (sometimes including delimiting commas). For those familiar with Rust’s macro system, it is comparable to something like { $($l:label : $sigma:large_typ),* } . Large and small semantic types The first thing we should observe is that large and small types aren’t really defining a new grammar, but instead a subgrammar of F ω types (so we have { σ } ⊆ { Σ } ⊆ { Ξ } ⊆ { τ } \{ \sigma \} \subseteq \{ \Sigma \} \subseteq \{ \Xi \} \subseteq \{ \tau \} { σ } ⊆ { Σ } ⊆ { Ξ } ⊆ { τ } ). This is why the metavariable τ \tau τ doesn’t appear much in the rest of the paper from now on — most of the F ω stuff going on will be restricted to semantic types. The only wrinkle is the new type formers: the singleton [ = Ξ ] [= \Xi] [ = Ξ ] and the function type with a purity annotation Σ → η Ξ \Sigma \to_\eta \Xi Σ → η ​ Ξ . The paper defines these via desugaring to F ω types with single-field records, but an implementation will find it easier to treat them as their own type constructors. Paths The path grammar is a little wonky. It allows repetition of σ \sigma σ in two different ways, suggesting that a path is an F ω type variable applied to a list of lists of small types, like π : : = α σ ‾ ‾ \pi ::= \alpha \overline{\overline\sigma} π ::= α σ . My guess is that this is just a mistake; it suggests that paths have structure beyond the F ω types of which they are supposed to be a subgrammar, and nothing in the rest of the paper goe
