---
id: 101
url: https://lawrencecpaulson.github.io//2025/12/05/History_of_Proof_Assistants.html
title: 50 years of proof assistants
domain: lawrencecpaulson.github.io
source_date: '2025-12-13'
tags:
- academic-paper
- compilers
summary: This article chronicles 50 years of progress in proof assistants—computational
  tools that verify mathematical proofs—starting with Edinburgh LCF in 1975. The field
  evolved from a niche, mathematically limited system through key developments like
  HOL and Isabelle, culminating in the mid-1990s when proof assistants gained credibility
  through practical applications like hardware verification and John Harrison's groundbreaking
  formalization of real analysis and floating-point arithmetic. The author argues
  that despite early skepticism from the broader computer science community, proof
  assistants represent genuine scientific and technological progress driven by academic
  research and government funding.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# 50 years of proof assistants

Machine Logic At the junction of computation, logic and mathematics 50 years of proof assistants 05 Dec 2025 [ memories LCF HOL system Isabelle Coq MJC Gordon ] Crackpots ranging from billionaire Peter Thiel to random YouTube influencers claim that science has been stagnating for the past 50 years. They admit that computing is an exception: they don’t pretend that my personal 32GB laptop is not an advance over the 16MB mainframe that served the whole Caltech community when I was there. Instead they claim that advances in computing were driven solely by industrial research, quite overlooking the role of academia and government funding in pushing the VLSI revolution, RISC processor design, networking, hypertext, virtual memory and indeed computers themselves. As for the industrial research, most of it came from just two “blue sky” institutes – Bell Labs and Xerox PARC – that closed a long time ago. LCF-style proof assistants are a world away from mainstream computing, so let’s look at 50 years of progress there. 1975–1985: Edinburgh LCF The first instance of LCF was Stanford LCF, developed by Robin Milner in 1972, but it was not an LCF-style proof assistant! LCF meant “Logic for Computable Functions”, a quirky formalism based on Scott domains and intended for reasoning about small functional programs. But “LCF-style proof assistant” means one that, like Edinburgh LCF, was coded in some form of the ML programming language and provided a proof kernel, encapsulated in an abstract type definition, to ensure that a theorem could only be generated by applying inference rules to axioms or other theorems: … the ML type discipline is used… so that—whatever complex procedures are defined—all values of type thm must be theorems, as only inferences can compute such values…. This security releases us from the need to preserve whole proofs… — an important practical gain since large proofs tended to clog up the working space… [ Edinburgh LCF , page IV] Edinburgh LCF was first announced in 1975, which conveniently is exactly 50 years ago, at the almost mythical conference on Proving and Improving Programs held at Arc-et-Senans. The user manual , published in the Springer lecture notes series, came out in 1979. Edinburgh LCF introduced some other principles that people still adhere to today: inference rules in the natural deduction style, with a dynamic set of assumptions a goal-directed proof style, where you start with the theorem statement and work backwards a structured system of theories to organise groups of definitions Edinburgh LCF had its own version of the ML language. It supported a fragment of first-order logic containing the logical symbols $\forall$, $\land$ and $\to$ along with the relation symbols $\equiv$ and $\sqsubseteq$. It introduced proof tactics and also tacticals : operators for combining tactics. Tactics supported goal-directed proof, but Edinburgh LCF had no notion of the current goal or anything to help the user manage the tree of subgoals. Its user interface was simply the ML top level and the various theorem-proving primitives were simply ML functions. ML stood for metalanguage , since managing the process of proof was its exact job. Avra Cohn and Robin Milner wrote a report on proving the correctness of a parsing algorithm using Edinburgh LCF. The proof consists of one single induction followed by a little simplification and other reasoning. The report includes a succinct description of Edinburgh LCF. It is a nice snapshot of the state of the art in 1982, when I arrived in Cambridge to join a project run by Robin Milner and Mike Gordon. Full of youthful enthusiasm, I told Mike that it would be great if one day we could formalise the Prime Number Theorem. I hardly knew what the theorem was about or how to prove it, but my college roommate had told me it was really deep. Disappointed to discover that we only had $\forall$, $\land$ and $\to$, I set out to fix that, to support full first-order logic. I ended up changing so much (backwards compatibility is overrated) that people eventually shamed me into writing my own user manual . Cambridge LCF never caught on because, well, nobody liked the LCF formalism. But I used it for a development that seemed big at the time: to verify the unification algorithm . This development was later ported to Isabelle . It contains 36 inductions, so we were making progress. And this takes us to 1985, exactly 40 years ago; see also this survey of the state of play. But there was almost no mathematics: no negative numbers and no decimal notation, so you could not even write 2+2=4. As far as the broader computer science community was concerned, we were a joke. 1985–1995: Cambridge LCF and HOL Cambridge LCF was in itself a dead end, but because it included a much faster ML compiler, it ended up being incorporated into a lot of other proof assistants, notably Mike’s HOL88 . And just like that, hardware verification became a reality. Although software verification seemed stuck in the doldrums, a couple of production-ready chip designs were verified! Mike’s explanation was that hardware verification was simply easier. Also in 1985, we got a new standard for the ML language and, soon, two compilers for it. So then I started working on experiments that would lead to Isabelle . It would be like LCF but would support constructive type theory, crucially allowing both unification and backtracking, like in Prolog. But there was no working system yet, just a grant application. And that was the state of play 40 years ago. Funding secured, Isabelle development started in earnest in 1986. It was coded in Standard ML from the start, while HOL88 was ported from the Cambridge LCF version of ML to Standard ML, emerging as HOL90. Mike acquired a bevy of energetic PhD students, who engaged in verification projects or built extensions for HOL. Versions of HOL were being used in institutes around the world. Stepping aside from HOL for a moment, other proof assistants had made great progress by the mid 1990s. The addition of inductive definitions to the calculus of constructions gave us the calculus of inductive constructions , which in essence is the formalism used today by Rocq and Lean. The very first release of Isabelle/HOL happened in 1991 , primarily the work of Tobias Nipkow, though I was soon to join in . Isabelle/ZF, which was my pet project, formalised axiomatic set theory to some quite deep results . But I am still not certain whether negative numbers were supported (can somebody help me?). Our weak support for arithmetic may seem odd when our research community was aware that the real numbers had been formalised in AUTOMATH , but we didn’t seem to want them. To many, we were still a joke. This was about to change. 1995–2005: Proof assistants come of age In 1994, came the Pentium with its FDIV bug : a probably insignificant but detectable error in floating-point division. The subsequent product recall cost Intel nearly half a billion dollars. John Harrison, a student of Mike’s, decided to devote his PhD research to the verification of floating-point arithmetic. By June 1996 he had submitted an extraordinary thesis , Theorem Proving with the Real Numbers , which described a formidable series of achievements: a formalisation of the real member system in HOL formalised analysis including metric spaces, sequences and series, limits, continuity and differentiation, power series and transcendental functions, integration proper numerals represented internally by symbolic binary, and calculations on them computer algebra techniques including a decision procedure for real algebra tools and techniques for floating-point verification by reference to the IEEE standard This thesis, which I had the privilege to examine, won a Distinguished Dissertation Award and was published as a book by Springer. So by the middle of the 1990s, which was 30 years ago, we had gone from almost no arithmetic to a decent chunk of formalised real analysis that was good enough to verify actual floating-point algorithms. This period also saw something of an arms race in automation. My earlier, Prolog-inspired vision of backtracking search had led to some fairly general automation that was effective not just in standard predicate logic but with any theorems were expressed in a form suitable for forward or backward chaining. I had also done experiments with classical automatic techniques such as model elimination, which, although pathetic compared with automatic provers of that era, was good enough to troll users on the hol-info mailing list. Soon I had provoked John Harrison to build a superior version of ME for HOL Light. Later, Joe Hurd built his metis superposition prover, which found its way into HOL4. Not to be outdone, Tobias made Isabelle’s simplifier the best in its class incorporating a number of sophisticated refinements, including some great ideas from Nqthm. Twenty years from the start of this chronology we now had several reasonably mature and powerful systems, including Isabelle/ZF, Isabelle/HOL, multiple versions of the HOL system, and Coq (now Rocq). 1 Many of them used Proof General , a common user interface for tactic-based proof assistants based on the Emacs editor. And we had 100MHz machines, some with 64MB of memory! We were ready to do big things. During this period, I did a lot of work on the verification of cryptographic protocols , also here . These secure Internet connections and other network communications; they are valuable when you need to know who is on the other end and need to keep messaging secure from eavesdropping and tampering. Among the protocols investigated were the ubiquitous TLS and the late, unlamented SET protocol. These proofs were not at the level of code or bits; buggy implementations could and did emerge. In 2005, the big thing that caught everyone’s eye was George Gonthier’s formalisation (in Coq) of the Four Colour Theorem. Most educated people had heard of the theorem alrea
