---
id: 112
url: https://engineerguy.com/fourier/pdfs/albert-michelsons-harmonic-analyzer.pdf
title: A machine that does mechanical Fourier analysis
domain: engineerguy.com
source_date: '2025-12-06'
tags:
- academic-paper
- physics
summary: Albert Michelson's Harmonic Analyzer is a nineteenth-century mechanical machine
  that performs Fourier analysis and synthesis—decomposing complex periodic functions
  into their constituent sinusoids or combining sinusoids to create intricate patterns.
  Michelson invented the machine to automate the tedious hand calculations required
  for analyzing light frequencies from flames, improving upon earlier designs by using
  springs and levers instead of error-prone rope-and-pulley systems. The 80-element
  analyzer represents an elegant mechanical solution to a fundamental mathematical
  problem with applications spanning from image processing to data compression.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# A machine that does mechanical Fourier analysis

Albert Michelson’s Harmonic Analyzer This PDF is free for you to view and share for non-commercial purposes. Be sure to check out the video series on the EngineerGuy channel on YouTube. More information about the videos, posters, and this book—including how to buy a printed copy—can be found at EngineerGuy.com. 0° 90° 180° 270° Harmonic Analyzer Albert Michelson’s A Visual Tour of a Nineteenth Century Machine that Performs Fourier Analysis Bill Hammack, Steve Kranz & Bruce Carpenter Articulate Noise Books © 2014 Bill Hammack, Steve Kranz, & Bruce Carpenter All rights reserved. Published 2014 Albert Michelson’s Harmonic Analyzer: A Visual Tour of a Nineteenth Century Machine that Performs Fourier Analysis Bill Hammack, Steve Kranz, Bruce Carpenter ISBN-13: 978-0-9839661-6-6 (hardcover) ISBN-13: 978-0-9839661-7-3 (paperback) 1. Mathematical instruments—Calculators 2. Michelson, Albert A. (Albert Abraham), 1852–1931 3. Mathematical analysis—Fourier analysis—Fourier Series Photography and design by Steve Kranz Epigram To Michelson: What manner of man was so wise, As to make a machine Synthesize? —With springs and levers it combines Weighted sines or cosines— And most wondrous of all: Analyze! vii Contents Preface xi Introduction 1 Visual Table of Contents 4 Fourier Synthesis 6 Fourier Analysis 8 The Harmonic Analyzer 11 Crank 12 Cone Gear Set 16 Cylinder Gear Set 22 Rocker Arms 26 Amplitude Bars 30 Measuring Stick 34 Springs and Levers 38 Summing Lever 42 Counter Spring 44 Magnifying Lever 46 Magnifying Wheel 50 Platen 54 Translational Gearing 56 Pen Mechanism 64 Pinion Gear 66 Provenance 70 Output from the Machine 75 Michelson’s 1898 Paper 90 Math Overview 98 Eight Views of the Machine 101 Notes on the Design 118 ix Preface I n October 2012 the three of us set out to create a video series to illuminate the hidden importance of Fourier methods in our mod- ern technological world. We had intended to stay firmly rooted in the twenty-first century; instead we discovered a machine that took us over one hundred years into the past. We learned, while researching Fourier methods, of nineteenth centu- ry machines that performed Fourier synthesis and analysis. We thought such a machine would be an ideal subject for a video series to present Fourier methods in a highly visual way. This line of thought awoke in two of us—Bill and Bruce—dim memories of such a machine located somewhere in Altgeld Hall, home of the University of Illinois’s Depart- ment of Mathematics. We rushed to that building, a three-minute walk from where we were planning our video series, and found, sitting in a glass case in the sec- ond floor hallway, a wonderful contraption of gears, spring and levers—a Fourier analyzer. The Department of Mathematics graciously granted our request to free the analyzer from its case so that we could film it. We moved it to our machine shop, where Mike Harland and Tom Wilson designed and built a replacement for the missing mechanism that holds the pen. We thank the members of our Advance Reader Program for their very useful comments and corrections. We brought the machine into our studio, and as we investigated its operation, its charms overwhelmed us. It became the star of the video series, and the subject of this book. While the book stands alone, we encourage readers to watch the videos exploring its operation at www.engineerguy.com/fourier. Bill Hammack, Steve Kranz & Bruce Carpenter xi T .his book celebrates a harmonic analyzer designed in the late nineteenth century by the physicist Albert Michelson. A harmonic analyzer can carry out two related tasks: it can add together weighted sines or cosines to produce a function, and it can perform the inverse operation of decomposing a given func- tion into its constituent sinusoids. The addition of sinusoids is called Fourier synthesis. While adding only sinusoids seems limiting, the machine can create beautiful patterns that look nothing like sinusoids: it produces beats, peaks, flat sections, or other complicated patterns. Introduction bearing “luminiferous aether.” Yet he studied many different physical phenomena, among them the light emitted by flames. He noted that a flame made by burning even a pure element was composed of light of different frequencies. Michelson wanted to know the exact values of these frequencies. He measured the emission from these elements us- ing an interferometer, the same type of device he used in the Michel- son-Morley experiment. In an interferometer a beam of light is split into two paths and then recombined. By varying the length of one of the beams Michelson could cause the recombined beams to interfere constructively or destructively. The amount of interference depended on the frequencies of light in the beam. To extract the frequencies he used Fourier analysis. At first Michelson performed by hand the Fou- rier analysis needed to determine those frequencies, but soon found it laborious. “Every one who has had occasion,” he once wrote, “to calculate or to construct graphically the resultant of a large number of simple harmonic motions [sinusoids] has felt the need of some simple and fairly accurate machine which would save the considerable time and labor involved in such computations.” This need lead him to the invention and construction of the harmonic analyzer described in this book. He began by studying the scientific literature on harmonic ana- lyzers. He found only one “practical instrument”: an analyzer devel- oped by Lord Kelvin to calculate tide tables. To create the sinusoidal motions needed to simulate tides Kelvin strung ropes around pulleys. These ropes were the machine’s great flaw, as Michelson, a superb experimentalist, immediately saw: “The range of the machine is however limited to a small number of elements on account of the stretch of the cord and its imperfect flexibility, so that with a considerable in- crease in the number of elements the accumulated errors due to these causes would soon neutralize the advantages of the increased number of terms in the series.” Astonishingly, the machine can also reveal the recipe for making these rich patterns. Given any even or odd periodic func- tion, the analyzer can calculate the proper weighting to use when approximating that function by a series of cosines or sines. This mathematical operation is called Fourier analysis. A generalized form of Fourier analysis is central in solving many scientific and engineering problems. A few examples of their diverse applica- tions include: removing noise from images sent by nasa space probes, compressing sound recordings to make mp3s, and deter- mining the arrangement of atoms in a crystal. Today, mention of Michelson brings to mind the Nobel Prize winning Michelson-Morley experiment, that famous mea- surement of the speed of light that ruled out a stationary light- These patterns were produced by the harmonic analyzer described in this book. The pattern in the upper left is beats, upper right a sinc, and lower left a square wave. The pattern in the lower right was made by setting the machine’s amplitudes bars randomly. 1 To eliminate the problems caused by the stretching ropes Michelson considered several solutions. “Among the methods which appeared most promising,” he wrote, “were addition of fluid pressures, elastic and other forces, and electrical currents. Of these the simplest in practice is doubtless the addition of the forces of spiral springs.” Using springs he first built a 20-element analyzer, one that calculates with 20 sinusoids with radian frequencies starting at 1, the fundamental, followed by the harmonics 2, 3, and so on up to 20. He found the “results obtained were so encouraging that it was decided to apply to the Bache Fund for assistance in building the present machine of eighty elements.” His application succeeded: he got $400.00. With those funds he built a harmonic analyzer with 80 elements, which he described in detail in an article published in The American Journal of Science. (This paper is reproduced on pg. 90.) In that paper Michelson mentions his plans to build an ana- lyzer with 1000 elements. His grand vision never came to be, per- haps because of technical limitations in materials and machining, or perhaps because of other demands on Michelson’s time. And while this machine was never built, with today’s computational power we essentially have Michelson’s harmonic analyzer built into many de- vices: it is in every mobile phone, every telecommunications system, and in every computer program that manipulates an image. Albert Michelson (1852-1931) In 1898 Michelson and his coauthor Stratton published a paper in The American Journal of Science that detailed an 80-element har- monic analyzer closely related to the 20-element analyzer featured in this book. A facsimile of the complete paper is included in this book (pg. 90). 3 2 crank p. 12 provenance p. 70 platen and pen p. 54, 64 magnifying wheel p. 50 magnifying lever p . 46 counter spring p. 44 amplitude bars p. 30 measuring stick p. 34 pinion gear p. 66 translational gearing p. 56 rocker arms p. 26 cylinder gear set p .22 cone gear set p. 16 springs and levers p. 38 summing lever p. 42 Visual table of contents 5 4 The variable x is proportional to the rotation of the crank. x n cos(nx) an ∑ 20 n = 1 ƒ(x) The variable sizes of gears in the cone set drive the gears in the cylinder set at different frequencies. The nth gear on the cylinder gear set spins at a rate n times as fast as the first gear. There are twenty gears and so there are twenty frequencies produced. Cams attached to the gears in the cylinder gear set produce near-sinusoidal oscillations at the tips of the rocker arms. Each rocker arm produces its own sinusoidal wave. The positions of these bars along the rocker arms set the values of the co- efficients an that weight the sinusoids—there is one bar for each of the 20 frequencies. A summing lever at the top of the machine adds together the weighted sinusoids. The writing apparatus at the front of the machine plots the resulting sum as a continuous function. symbol mechanism interpretation page 12 16 26 30 42 64 ƒ(x) = ∑ an cos(nx) 20 n = 1 Fourier Synthesis This machine implements a simplified equation used in Fourier synthesis: This symbol, an (read: “A sub N”), is called the coefficient. The values of an (a1, a2, a3, ... , a20) determine the function that will be synthesized. A cosine is a wave. It is periodic, which means it repeats after a given period. It always has a value between -1 and 1. Each value of an is the amplitude of a particular cosine. The value of n determines how many oscillations there are in the cosine. If the cosines are stacked one on top of the other, this adds them together—this is the summation. A line drawn across the top of the stacked cosines is ƒ(x), the resultant function. The value n is an integer that ranges from 1 to 20. It deter- mines the frequency—i.e., the number of oscillations—for each cosine in the equation. The symbol ∑ is the Greek letter sigma. In mathematics it denotes a summa- tion. On the bottom “n=1” means that n is the index variable which starts at 1. The “20” on the top means that we stop counting n once we get to 20. The variable x is the position along the horizontal axis of a plot of the cosine. ƒ(x) is the result of the summation. We’ll take a look at this equation and then run through it piece by piece to better understand the meaning of each part. On the facing page, we show how the components of the equation are implemented by the analyzer. 6 7 The value of n corresponds to the turning of the crank, and more precisely, to the angular rotation of the first gear in the cylinder gear set. Every two turns of the crank increases the variable n by 1. n k cos(k n ) an ∑ 20 k = 1 ƒk Each gear in the cylindrical gear set spins with an angular velocity propor- tional to the size of the cone gear it engages. There are twenty gears and so twenty frequencies. As the crank is turned, sinusoids of varying frequency appear when viewing the tips of the rocker arms from the side of the machine. The function to be analyzed is sampled at discrete points and these values are used to set the location of the corresponding amplitude bars on the rocker arms. The summing lever at the top of the machine adds together the weighted sinusoids. The writing apparatus at the front of the machine plots a continuous function, which is read every two full cranks to yield the approximate value of an. symbol mechanism interpretation page 12 16 26 30 42 64 an ≈ ∑ ƒk cos(kn ) 20 k = 1 20 π— 20 π— This breaking apart is a non-intuitive mathematical operation (see pg. 99) to find the weights, an, of the sinusoids that can be summed to approximate the function. Michelson himself once said, “the ex- planation of this process [analysis] involves so much mathematics that I shall not undertake it here.”* The difficulty of analysis is the reason why this machine was built. The math boils down to the single equation at the top of the next page. Fourier Analysis synthesis A sequence of sinusoids... ...is added together... ...to form a signal. analysis A signal... ...is broken apart... ...into a sequence of sinusoids. *Albert Michelson, Light Waves and Their Uses (Chi- cago: The University of Chicago Press, 1907) p. 73. Chapter 4 of this book has an excellent discussion of how Michelson used the analyzer in his spectroscopic investigations. 8 9 The Harmonic Analyzer 11 T .he crank provides the sole motive power for all the operations of the machine. As the operator turns the crank, the machine comes alive: the gears si- lently spin, the rocker arms seesaw, the springs elongate and contract, the pen moves up and down, and the paper travels sideways. The handle of the crank, a smooth piece of wood stained black, has a shape well-suited for a firm grip, and it rotates on a pivot so that the operator’s hand doesn’t slip while turning. Due to the changing positions of the springs, amplitude bars, and rocker arms, the force required to turn the crank can vary markedly as it rotates. A tapered pin, which affixes the crank to a shaft, can be removed so the gear on the crankshaft can be changed (pg. 56). Notice the small fiducial indentations that aid alignment when replacing the crank. The small eyelet on the side of the crank arm once held a small chain, now long lost, that tethered the pin to the crank. Crank 12 13 14 15 T .he crank rotates a conically-shaped set of gears, reduced in 4:1 ratio, so that one turn of the crank turns the cone gear set a quarter of a revolution. This cone gear set, not commonly seen in other machines, changes the continuous motion of the crank into the twenty different frequencies needed by the machine. The set consists of twenty different spur gears that are fixed to the same shaft so that they rotate together. Each gear on the cone gear set engages a corresponding gear on the cylinder set at an oblique angle; this lack of full engagement has left distinct wear patterns on the teeth of all the gears, with the smallest gears of the cone ex- hibiting the most wear. The smallest spur gear has six teeth, the next larger has 12 teeth, with each succeeding gear having 6 more teeth than the gear before, up to the twentieth gear with 120 teeth. The four smallest gears at the tip of the cone are slightly more yellow in appearance and seem to be made of a different, perhaps harder met- al. By loosening a knob, the cone gear set can be pivoted out of engagement so that the cylinder set can be aligned for generating either sines or cosines (pg. 66). Cone Gear Set 16 17 18 19 20 21 T .he 20 gears on the cone gear set engage a “cylin- drical” set of gears. The gears on the cone set have graduated sizes, but all spin at the same angular velocity. In contrast, the gears on the cylinder set are of equal size, but each gear spins independently with an angular veloc- ity proportional to the size of the corresponding gear on the cone set. The cylinder gear set is actually a sandwich, alternating shiny brass gears with black, rough-finished connecting rods. Each connecting rod rides on a cam (see cam outline on pg. 25) attached to the cylinder gear to its right. As a particular gear on the cylinder turns, its cam drives the corresponding connecting rod in a reciprocating up-and-down motion, producing a near- sinusoidal oscillation on a rocker arm attached to the other end of the rod. This combination of mechanical elements produces the twenty different frequencies used in the analyzer. Another feature of the cylinder gear set, one easily overlooked on cursory inspection, is that each gear contains a notch, approximately 3 mm in depth, that is used to align the gears on the cylinder as well as to set up the analyzer to calculate with either sines or cosines (see pg. 66 for a description of the alignment process). Cylinder Gear Set 22 23 25 24 A set of matte-black vertical connecting rods .transfer the oscillatory motions of the cams associ- ated with the cylinder gears to a set of rocker arms. The arms are shaped concave upwards with a radius of cur- vature the same as the length of the amplitude bars that ride on them. As the crank is turned, the motion of the ends of the rockers is fascinating to watch (see the pic- tures on the left of the following spread): each individual rocker arm seesaws up-and-down in a continuous near- sinusoidal motion, at a frequency determined by its cor- responding cylinder gear. And at the same time, when viewed from the side of the machine, the ends of the rocker arms show a mesmerizing collective motion: the ends are discretized samples of a sinusoid with frequency determined by the total number of crank turns. Rocker Arms 26 27 28 29 T .wenty long vertical rods, about 80 cm in length, run up the spine of the analyzer; their chrome-like finish glistens, albeit marred by patches of rust. These rods are called amplitude bars, and their long length ameliorates the nonlinearity inherent in transmit- ting the weighted sinusoidal motion of the rocker arms to the spring-loaded levers at the top of the analyzer. The position of a particular bar along its rocker arm determines the weighting coefficient, or amplitude, for the corresponding sinusoid. At the bottom of each am- plitude bar there is a notch that lets the bar slide along its rocker arm for positioning. While being positioned, a bar produces a satisfying metallic squeak—virtually the only sound the machine ever makes, even during opera- tion. Positive amplitudes are set by positioning the bar on one side of the rocker arm pivot, negative amplitudes on the opposite side. Positioning a bar at the pivot point of its rocker arm sets that coefficient to zero. Care must be taken by the operator during positioning because the bars can slide completely off the rocker. Amplitude Bars 30 31 32 33 T .o set the amplitude bars on the rocker arms the ma- chine manufacturer, Wm. Gaertner & Co., provided a ruled brass gauge with a stop that slides and locks. The gauge is marked 0 to 10, but the scale is not inches, nor centimeters, but just the 10 equal divisions of one half of the rocker arm. To use it one first sets the value of the coefficient—“2.0” and “9.3” as shown on the pages that follow—lays the stick on the rocker arms, and then slides the amplitude bar, which screeches slightly, out to meet it. Note that the markings are hand stamped, and that the tick mark for 0.5 is longer than any other. Also, some of the markings are unevenly spaced— the distance between 0.4 and 0.5 is smaller than the distance between 0.5 and 0.6—which indicates that the measuring stick was handcrafted. For illustrative settings of the ampli- tude bars see page 78. Measuring Stick 34 35 36 37 A t the top of the machine twenty cast metal levers _move up and down in sync with the rocker arms. A pivot at each lever’s end is the fulcrum, and the load at the lever’s opposite end comes from the pull of one of twenty springs attached to a pivoted summing lever. The motion of these third-class levers mirrors that of the rocker arms, but modulated by the positions of the amplitude bars. If an amplitude bar rests in the middle of a rocker arm (at the pivot point) the lever at top stays motionless; if the amplitude bar has been slid to one of the edges of the rocker arm the lever’s motion reflects the full amplitude of the tip of the rocker arm; and if the am- plitude bar is slid fully to the opposite end of the rocker arm, the lever’s motion is 180 degrees out-of-phase, so that when the rocker arm rises, the lever at top drops. Springs and Levers 38 39 40 41 T .his harmonic analyzer is very tall in relation to its base in order to accommodate the motions cre- ated with every turn of the crank. The results of these motions are quietly summed at the top of the machine by an oddly-shaped summing lever. On the end of the sum- ming lever that connects to the twenty small springs from the top levers, it is wide and flat; the other end is long and narrow and connects to a single larger spring which provides counterbalance. The springs on both sides hold this first-class lever in suspension, and its fulcrum is a knife edge in order to reduce friction. The range of mo- tion of the summing lever is very small, on the order of only a few millimeters. The analyzer has mechanisms that bring these motions to human-scale by magnifying and recording them. Summing Lever 42 43 A long spring towers above the machine. One .end of the spring connects to a hook on the pivoted summing lever; the other end connects to a curved, tapered post. This large-diameter spring counterbalances the accumulated pull on the sum- ming lever of the twenty individual smaller springs. The machine’s operator changes the tension on this counter spring by loosening a square-head screw and adjusting the height of the post up or down. Close examination reveals gouges that mar the fin- ish of the post that were left by the screw during previous height adjustments of the counter spring. Counter Spring 44 45 E ven though the combined force of twenty small springs tugs at one end of the summing lever, its resulting motion sweeps out an arc of only a few millimeters. This motion must be magnified to produce useful output. Firmly affixed to the sum- ming lever is a round brass rod that magnifies the sweep of the summing lever up to a factor of four. The motion of this rod, called the magnifying lever, is communicated to the writing apparatus below by a long wire attached to a smaller vertical rod. The operator sets the amount of magnification by slid- ing this vertical rod along the magnifying lever and then tightening a reeded screw to keep it in place. The operator can also adjust the vertical placement of the machine’s output by sliding a fixture up and down on the vertical rod. A wire is hooked to this fixture and communicates the motion to the magni- fying wheel. Magnifying Lever 46 47 minimum half-way maximum Adjusting the vertical amplification When this knob sits toward the bottom of this vertical rod, the pen writes lower on the paper. When the knob is toward the top, the function is drawn higher up, effectively adding a constant to the function being drawn. minimum lever setting half-way maximum output 48 49 A thin wire attached to the magnifying lever pulls _on the inner hub of a magnifying wheel. This mag- nifying wheel is a pulley comprised of two coaxial wheels that rotate together: a small inner wheel (the hub) and a larger outer wheel. The wheel oscillates as the operator turns the crank; its circular motion mirrors the peaks and valleys of the output. A separate wire is wrapped around the larger wheel and attaches to the pen mechanism. The diameter of the outer wheel is five times the diameter of the inner wheel (100 mm versus 20 mm) and so the mo- tion from the end of the magnifying lever is magnified by a constant factor of five. This wire attaches to the top of the post holding the machine’s pen so that the wheel’s rocking turns into an up and down motion of the pen. To set up the machine an operator first wraps the outer wire around the hub, holding it in place while looping another wire around the inner hub. If not done carefully the wheel unwinds causing the wires to fly off the hubs and the pen to drop. Magnifying Wheel 50 51 52 53 platen T .he heavy brass platen, likely darkened by some treatment, moves a piece of recording paper hori- zontally while the pen moves vertically. These motions allow for two-dimensional drawing. A toothed brass rack along the platen’s bottom edge engages a set of gears driven by the crank. This set of gears shown in the following pages can be unlatched from the platen’s rack so that the platen can be moved freely when resetting the machine between calculations. For every new calculation the operator replaces the recording paper by sliding it under the two brass clips on the left and right sides of the platen. Platen front side back side 54 55 large small medium medium small large T .he analyzer has a set of six translational gears that trans- fer the motion of the crank to the platen. Because the crank also drives the cone gear set, it must turn through a large num- ber of revolutions to generate the 20 different frequencies. Two of the translational gears are used in a fixed gear reduction of the crank speed. Two of the gears form a rack and pinion that converts the rotary gear motion to linear motion of the platen. The final two gears—the ones connected by a chain, one at the front of the platen, the other on the crankshaft—can be removed and replaced with gears of different sizes so that the operator can fine-tune the speed of the platen as the crank is turned. There is a small latch that allows the operator to disengage the gearing from the plat- en; this allows the platen to be quickly reset as well as producing slack in the chain for gear replacement. Changing the platen speed changes the horizontal scaling of the output. These two remov- able gears come in three sizes: small, medium, and large as shown below. Each can be attached to either the platen drive mechanism (upper gear) or the crankshaft (lower gear), as shown on pages 60 and 61. The facing page shows that the small-large gear combina- tion moves the platen the fastest and so yields the greatest horizon- tal scaling, while the large-small combination moves the platen the slowest and so gives the smallest horizontal scaling. Translational Gearing large small gearing medium medium small large periods 0.5 1 2 output 56 57 58 59 upper gear lower gear 60 61 Looking down, close up on the front of the machine we see the gears that drive the platen. In this shot, the gearing is disengaged from the latch (not visible) and the platen is slid to the left out of frame. The rectangular bar that goes from the top left corner of the image to the right side is the bar that the platen rides on. Here, we see a view of the translational gearing from the back side of the machine. 62 63 T .hese brass pieces are about 100 years younger than any other part of the machine. This analyzer was missing its writing mechanism for recording the results of its calculations. To rebuild this we reviewed photos and drawings of other Michelson analyzers. In these images, we found several types of writing mechanisms—some machines used a long, horizontal lever arm, like a seismo- graph, while others had a pen attached to a long, rigid, vertical rod. Ultimately, we built a simple replacement: a brass frame holds a marker in a v-block, which is attached to a square brass rod, which in turn is attached to the wire from the magnifying wheel. The marker, which moves vertically, draws a curve as the platen moves horizontally underneath it. There is also a small set screw that adjusts the angle of the pen to the paper. This allows the operator to reduce the friction between the marker and paper to produce the smoothest output. Pen Mechanism 64 65 T .he harmonic analyzer can calculate using ei- ther cosines or sines. Before using the machine, the gears in the cylindrical train must be aligned to ensure that the twenty sinusoids it produces will be in phase at the start. To do this the operator first disengages the cone gear set via a pivot at its tip. Each gear on the cyl- inder set has a reference mark—a single notch about 3 mm in depth. The operator, using their fingers, rotates each gear in the cylindrical train until the notches line up. After this alignment, a small lever is used to engage the pinion gear with the cylinder gear set. The operator turns the pinion gear, which now moves all the cylinder gears as one, to set the machine to use either sines or cosines. If the notches all point toward the top, the ana- lyzer is set to calculate with cosines; if the notches are 90 degrees from this position, the analyzer calculates with sines. The pinion gear is then disengaged, and the cone gear set re-engaged with the cylinder gear set. Each of these steps tends to move the cylinder gears slightly out of alignment, so constant correction is required. Pinion Gear Nikon D60, Nikon 16mm f/2.8 A 66 67 disengaged engaged disengaged gap engaged 68 69 T .he harmonic analyzer depicted in this book has a nameplate affixed to its base that declares this par- ticular machine was built by “Wm Gaertner & Co.” This small plate, 100 mm by 55 mm, helps date the machine. This company started in 1896 and then changed its name in 1923 to “The Gaertner Scientific Corporation.” So this machine must have been built between 1896 and 1923. The manufacturer and the date range for its manufacture are the only solid facts we have about its provenance— Provenance Several centimeters from the nameplate, a single ‘2’ is stamped in the corner of the baseplate. This machine may have been the second model manufactured in a particular production run. 70 71 to go further requires informed speculation. We don’t know who acquired it or even when it arrived at the University of Illinois’s Department of Mathematics. The best that we can do is report clues and hints based on the machine’s design and then correlate those fea- tures with information from reports of other Michel- son machines built by William Gaertner & Company. William Gaertner was a German-born instru- ment maker who worked on the South Side of Chi- cago until his death in 1948. Gaertner often built commercial versions of the instruments developed by Michelson, then a Professor at the nearby University of Chicago. Gaertner, for example, manufactured and sold the first commercial version of Michelson’s inter- ferometer, which was so successful that 50 years after the first one appeared 80% of the interferometers in use in the United States had been built by Gaertner’s company. Gaertner sold harmonic analyzers designed by Michelson in the early decades of the twentieth cen- tury. Two versions of the analyzer appear in the com- pany’s 1904 catalog, tucked in at the end after pages of interferometers and astronomical instruments. The catalog offers both a 20-element and an 80-element analyzer; it lists no price for either size, but from other research we know that Gaertner did sell some analyz- ers. The Columbia University Quarterly of 1901 high- lights the work of “Professor Hallock on the composi- tion of sounds,” noting that “he will use a Michelson harmonic analyzer just completed for him by Gaert- ner, of Chicago.” In 1904 the Victoria & Albert Mu- seum reported that “the most valuable acquisition dur- ing the year is ... an 80-element Harmonic Analyzer and Integrator, made by Gaertner, of Chicago, to the design of Michelson.” The University of Wisconsin’s Biennial Report for their regents mentions “Details of Disbursements, 1903-04: Wm. Gaertner & Co., har- monic analyzer $412.00.” The 1909 sessional papers of Canada—their legislative record—lists “Gaertner, Wm. & Co.: 20 element harmonic analyzer $225.” These photographs show Michelson’s 80-element analyzer on display ca. 1950-1960. Photos courtesy of the Nimitz Library, United States Naval Academy. And Ingersoll and Zobel in their 1913 book An Intro- duction to the Mathematical Theory of Heat Conduction describes Michelson’s 80-element analyzer and notes “a number of analyzers of this type have been made by Wm. Gaertner & Co. of Chicago.” After 1913 we could find no reports of the analyzer until 1933. At the 1933 World’s Fair a 20-element machine was featured in the Great Hall of Science under the title of “The Magic of Analysis.” The machine dis- played at the fair differed significantly from the an- alyzer described in this book. Frederick Collins, a British electrical engineer, noted that it was “greatly improved since [the] 1898 machine”, specifically “in- stead of a cone of gears that was used in the first ma- chine, a set of sine cams is used to give motion to the lever arms and tension of the springs.” This change in the gear train is confirmed by the recollection of the curator of Mathematics and Antique Instruments at the Smithsonian Institution; in a 1969 interview she recalled that Gaertner still made the analyzer in 1930, but noted that “they changed the design from the cone to the cylinder, and they made some modifications.” So our best guess about this machine’s origin and date is that it was one of several 20-element machines manufactured by Wm. Gaertner & Co. between 1896 and 1923 with a high probability that it was made be- tween 1901 to 1909—the era when we see the most reports of 20-element machines. We believe it was purchased for a research project, but, based on the overall lack of wear of the analyzer’s moving parts, it was likely never heavily used. The machine now sits proudly in a glass display case in Altgeld Hall, at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Left an 80-element machine; right a 20-element machine, nearly identical to the analyzer de- scribed in this book. The two pages reproduced above appeared in a 1904 Wm. Gaertner & Co. catalog of astronomical, physical and physiological instruments. This version of Michelson’s 20-element harmonic analyzer appeared at the 1933 World’s Fair. Its principal difference from the machine described in this book is the replacement of the cone-cyl- inder gear set with a set of sine cams. The harmonic analyzer explored in this book rests again where we originally found it: in a glass case in the Department of Mathematics at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 72 73 Output from the machine The next fourteen pages show the machine’s output for specific settings of the amplitude bars on the rocker arms. In generating this output the machine was set to use cosines, except for the results on page 89 where sines were used. Pages Description Cosines for all of the twenty frequencies that the machine can produce. The amplitude bars are set on the rocker arms to produce four different types of square waves. A cosine is sampled at twenty points and placed on the rocker arms. The twenty points span two periods, one full period, half a period and a quarter of a period. Arbitrary values are set on the rocker arms. A square wave is set on the rocker arms, but here the machine is set to calculate with sines. 76–77 78–81 82–85 86–88 89 Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 This set of amplitudes ... ... is placed on the rocker arms ... ... and produces this output on the front of the machine. 75 Input Output 1 0 10 9 0 10 10 0 10 5 0 10 4 0 10 3 0 10 2 0 10 8 0 10 6 0 10 7 0 10 Amplitude Rocker arm Input Output 11 0 10 20 0 10 12 0 10 16 0 10 15 0 10 14 0 10 13 0 10 19 0 10 17 0 10 18 0 10 Amplitude Rocker arm 76 77 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Input Output 78 79 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Input Output 80 81 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Input Output 82 83 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 −5 0 5 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Input Output 84 85 Input Output Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Input Output Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 Amplitude −10 0 10 Rocker arm 1 5 10 15 20 86 87
