---
id: 17
url: https://activeinference.github.io/papers/sajid.pdf
title: 'Active inference: demystified and compared'
domain: activeinference.github.io
source_date: '2026-01-10'
tags:
- academic-paper
- ai
- llm
summary: This paper presents active inference as a first-principles framework for
  autonomous agent decision-making and compares it directly with reinforcement learning.
  The key distinction is that active inference minimizes expected free energy using
  a belief-based Bayesian approach, whereas reinforcement learning explicitly maximizes
  reward signals—enabling active inference agents to exhibit natural behaviors like
  epistemic exploration and uncertainty quantification without explicit reward engineering.
  The authors demonstrate these differences empirically on OpenAI Gym environments,
  showing that active inference can solve tasks without reward signals through preference
  learning over observations.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Active inference: demystified and compared

Active inference: demystiﬁed and compared Noor Sajid1, Philip J. Ball2, Thomas Parr 1 and Karl J. Friston1 1Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurol- ogy, London, UK WC1N 3AR. 2Machine Learning Research Group, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford. Correspondence: Noor Sajid The Wellcome Centre for Human Neuroimaging, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK WC1N 3AR. +44 (0)20 3448 4362 noor.sajid.18@ucl.ac.uk Abstract Active inference is a ﬁrst principle account of how autonomous agents operate in dy- namic, non-stationary environments. This problem is also considered in reinforcement learning, but limited work exists on comparing the two approaches on the same discrete- state environments. In this paper, we provide: 1) an accessible overview of the discrete- state formulation of active inference, highlighting natural behaviors in active inference that are generally engineered in reinforcement learning; 2) an explicit discrete-state comparison between active inference and reinforcement learning on an OpenAI gym baseline. We begin by providing a condensed overview of the active inference literature, in particular viewing the various natural behaviors of active inference agents through the lens of reinforcement learning. We show that by operating in a pure belief-based setting, active inference agents can carry out epistemic exploration — and account for uncertainty about their environment — in a Bayes–optimal fashion. Furthermore, we show that the reliance on an explicit reward signal in reinforcement learning is removed in active inference, where reward can simply be treated as another observation we have a preference over; even in the total absence of rewards, agent behaviors are learned through preference learning. We make these properties explicit by showing two sce- narios in which active inference agents can infer behaviors in reward-free environments compared to both Q-learning and Bayesian model-based reinforcement learning agents; by placing zero prior preferences over rewards and by learning the prior preferences over the observations corresponding to reward. We conclude by noting that this formal- ism can be applied to more complex settings; e.g., robotic arm movement, Atari games, etc., if appropriate generative models can be formulated. In short, we aim to demystify the behavior of active inference agents by presenting an accessible discrete state-space and time formulation, and demonstrate these behaviors in a OpenAI gym environment, alongside reinforcement learning agents. Keywords: active inference, variational Bayesian inference, free energy principle, 2 generative models, reinforcement learning 1 Introduction Active inference provides a framework (derived from ﬁrst principles) for solving and understanding the behavior of autonomous agents in situations requiring decision-making under uncertainty [Friston et al., 2017a,b]. It uses the free energy principle to describe the properties of random dynamical systems (such as an agent in an environment), and by minimizing expected free energy over time, Bayes–optimal behavior can be obtained for a given environment [Friston et al., 2014, Friston, 2019]. More concretely, this op- timal behavior is determined by evaluating evidence (i.e., marginal likelihood) under an agent’s generative model of outcomes [Friston et al., 2016]. The agent’s generative model of the environment is an abstraction, which assumes certain internal (hidden) states give rise to these outcomes. One goal of the agent is to infer what these hidden states are, given a set of outcomes. The generative model also provides a way, through searching and planning, to form beliefs about the future. Thus, the agent can make informed decisions over which sequence of actions (i.e., policies) it is most likely to choose. In active inference, due to its Bayesian formulation, the most likely policies lead to Bayes–optimal outcomes (i.e., those most coherent with prior beliefs). This for- mulation has two complementary objectives: 1) infer Bayes–optimal behavior, and 2) optimize the generative model based on the agents ability to infer which hidden states gave rise to the observed data. Both can be achieved, simultaneously, by minimizing free energy functionals. This free energy formulation gives rise to realistic behaviors, 3 such as natural exploration-exploitation trade-offs, and — by being fully Bayesian — is amenable to on-line learning settings, where the environment is non-stationary. This follows from the ability to model uncertainty over contexts [Friston et al., 2015, Parr and Friston, 2017]. Active inference can also be seen as providing a formal framework for jointly opti- mizing action and perception [Millidge et al., 2020a]. In the context of machine learn- ing, this is often referred to as planning as inference [Attias, 2003, Botvinick and Tou- ssaint, 2012, Baker and Tenenbaum, 2014, Millidge et al., 2020a], and in the case of non-equilibrium physics, it is analogous to self-organization or self-assembly [Crauel and Flandoli, 1994, Seifert, 2012, Friston, 2019]. The main contributions of active inference, in contrast to analogous reinforcement learning (RL) frameworks, follow from its commitments to a pure belief-based scheme. Reinforcement learning is a broad term used in different ﬁelds. To make meaningful comparisons between active inference and reinforcement learning, we commit to the deﬁnition of reinforcement learning in [Sutton et al., 1998, Sutton and Barto, 2018]: “reinforcement learning is learning what to do – how to map situations to actions – so as to maximize a numerical reward signal”. RL algorithms, under this deﬁnition, can be model-based or model-free. Model-based methods learn a model of environmental dynamics which is used to infer a policy that maximizes long-term reward, while model- free RL estimates a policy that maximizes long-term reward directly from trajectory data. Throughout the paper, RL refers to both model-based and model-free unless stated otherwise. This deﬁnition rests on the reward hypothesis, that “any goal or purpose can be well thought of as maximization of the expected value of the cumulative sum 4 of a received scalar signal (reward)” [Sutton and Barto, 2018]. Here, reward is by deﬁnition some outcome that reinforces behavior, and hence a circular deﬁnition of reward behavior. For example going to the cafe and buying coffee can be explained from two perspectives: 1) a cup of coffee in the morning is intrinsically rewarding and therefore I go out to the cafe to get the coffee and 2) going to the cafe to get coffee means, tautologically, that coffee is rewarding. In short, rewards reinforce behaviors that secure rewards. Traditionally, these (model-free) RL algorithms operate directly on the state of the environment, but (model-based) RL algorithms that operate on beliefs also represent an active area of research [Igl et al., 2018]. Conversely, in active inference an agent’s interaction with the environment is deter- mined by action sequences that minimize expected free energy (and not the expected value of a reward signal). Additionally, unlike in reinforcement learning, the reward signal is not differentiated from other types of sensory outcomes. That is any type of outcome may be more or less preferred. This means that the implicit reward associated with any outcome is a feature of the creature seeing the observation - not the environ- ment they inhabit. This may be different for different agents, or even for the same agent at different points in time. This highlights that the two frameworks have fundamentally different objectives: reward-maximization in reinforcement learning and free energy minimization in active inference. In this paper, we reveal circumstances in which behavior might be the same and when it may differ under these two distinct objectives. We show that the main contribu- tions of active inference, in comparison to reinforcement learning, include: a) reward functions (i.e., prior preferences) are not always necessary because any policy has an 5 epistemic value, even in the absence of prior preferences, b) agents can learn their own reward function and this becomes a way of describing how the agent expects itself to behave – as opposed to getting something from the environment, c) a principled ac- count of epistemic exploration and intrinsic motivation as minimizing uncertainty [Parr and Friston, 2017, Schwartenbeck et al., 2019] and d) incorporating uncertainty as a natural part of belief updating [Parr and Friston, 2017]. Why are these contributions of interest? In standard reinforcement learning, the reward function deﬁnes the agent’s goal and allows it to learn how to best act within the environment [Sutton et al., 1998]. However, deﬁning the reward function is difﬁcult; if it is speciﬁc signal from the envi- ronment based on action, then is it unanimously good in that environment; e.g., should an agent controlling the thermostat only get positive reward for turning on the heating during winter? Consequently, crafting appropriate reward functions is not easy, and it is possible for agents to learn sub-optimal actions, if the reward function is poorly speciﬁed [Amodei et al., 2016]. However, active inference bypasses this problem by replacing the traditional reward function, used in reinforcement learning, with prior be- liefs about preferred outcomes. This causes the agent to act in a way — via the beliefs it holds — such that the observed outcomes match prior preferences. This is useful when we have imprecise or no prior preferences; since active inference endows agents with the ability to learn prior preferences from interacting with the environment itself — by learning and empirical prior distribution over preferred outcomes. In other words, an agent can learn the kinds of outcomes it can achieve, and these become its prior pref- erences (in virtue of the fact that these outcomes are achievable, they underwrite the agents viability in that environment). This way of deﬁning the reward function (prior 6 preferences) highlights that whether a state is rewarding (or not) is a function of the agent themselves, and not the environment. This reward function conceptualization is distinct from reward functions under reinforcement learning. Another challenge within reinforcement learning is balancing the ratio between ex- ploration and exploitation; i.e., what actions should the agent take at any given point in time? Should the agent continue to explore and ﬁnd more valuable actions or ex- ploit its (current) most valuable action sequence? Many different algorithms have been used to address this; including ϵ-greedy [Vermorel and Mohri, 2005, Mnih et al., 2013, 2016], action selection based on action-utility [Sutton, 1990] and counter-based strate- gies [Wiering and Schmidhuber, 1998, Tijsma et al., 2016], etc. However, even with these exploratory mechanisms in place, most reinforcement learning formulations, call on a temperature hyper-parameter, to weight extrinsic reward (from the environment) against the intrinsic motivation (from the agent). There is no such hyper-parameter in active inference — although the precision of various priors plays an analogous role — because the distinction between extrinsic value (i.e., expected reward) and intrinsic value (i.e., intrinsic motivation) is just one way of decomposing expected free energy. In active inference, everything minimizes free energy, including hyper-parameters. Usu- ally, these hyper-parameters transpire to be precision over various beliefs. This allows for a natural trade-off between epistemic exploration and pragmatic behavior. This means that all the required machinery is in play from the start but should only be added to the reinforcement framework (by deﬁnition) if it helps maximize expected return. Consequently, state-of-art reinforcement learning approaches can be regarded as a se- ries of reﬁnements to the base algorithm that help resolve problems as they are en- 7 countered including the need to marginalize out hyper-parameters instead of deﬁning particular values e.g., [Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2017]. Here, we unpack these properties of active inference, with appropriate ties to the reinforcement learning literature, under the discrete state-space and time formulation; thereby providing a brief overview of the theory. Furthermore, we demonstrate these properties, and points of contact, with reinforcement learning agents on a series of ex- periments using a modiﬁed FrozenLake OpenAI baseline. This is purely an illustration of the conceptual premises; not a demonstration of their implications. Thus, while our simulations of reinforcement learning could have included more complex (i.e., context- aware) aspects - such as in [Cao and Ray, 2012, Lloyd and Leslie, 2013, Padakandla et al., 2019] – these approaches describe various ways to perform inference, without explicit reference to their impact on behavior. Indeed, as shown by [O’Donoghue et al., 2020], state-of-the-art approaches, which can be seen as framing reinforcement learn- ing as probabilistic inference, make simpliﬁcations for practical reasons. These subtle modeling choices, that trade-off tractability for accuracy, can result in sub-optimal be- havior (e.g., failing to account for Q-value uncertainty, and ensuing dithering behavior). Active inference avoids this ambiguity by clearly deﬁning how latent variable models are constructed to solve POMDP problems, and how inference should proceed, using gradient descent on expected free energy. This allows the agent to consider the effect of its own actions upon future rewards (i.e., preferred outcomes) when evaluating the expected free energy of all plausible policies (i.e., action trajectories), based upon the anticipated consequences of those policies. However, these are Bellman–optimal for one time-step, but Bayes–optimal (i.e., realize prior beliefs and minimise free energy) 8 for distal time horizons. Additionally, by minimising expected free energy, the agent balances exploration and exploitation resulting in a Bayes-optimal arbitration between the two which may not be reward-maximizing from an RL perspective. In contrast to RL, active inference accounts for epistemic uncertainty by operating in an explic- itly belief-based framework [Levine, 2018]. Additionally, the conceptual approach of active inference means that all the appropriate terms — relating to intrinsic value of information — are in play from the start but should only be added to the reinforcement framework (by deﬁnition) if they help maximize long-term reward. Consequently, state- of-art reinforcement learning approaches can be regarded as a series of reﬁnements to the base algorithm that help resolve problems as they are experienced. Therefore, for explicit behavioral comparison, we simulate performance of the two frameworks after removal of the reward signal from the FrozenLake environment i.e., a ﬂat value func- tion. In this setting, there is no motivation for adding any additional information gain term because they cannot be justiﬁed in terms of increasing expected value of reward. The review comprises three sections. The ﬁrst section considers the discrete state- space and time formulation of active inference, and provides commentary on its deriva- tion, implementation, and connections to reinforcement learning. The second section provides a concrete example of the key components of the generative model and update rules in play, using a modiﬁed version of OpenAI’s FrozenLake environment. Through these simulations, we compared the performance of three types of agents: active infer- ence, Q-learning [Watkins and Dayan, 1992] using ϵ-greedy exploration and Bayesian model-based reinforcement learning using Thompson sampling [Poupart, 2018] in sta- tionary and non-stationary environments. We note that whilst all agents are able to 9 perform appropriately in a stationary setting, active inference’s ability to carry out on- line planning allows for Bayes–optimal behavior in the non-stationary environment. The simulations demonstrate that in the absence of a reward signal, the active inference exhibits information seeking behavior (to build a better model of its environment), in contrast to Q-learning agents, but similar to the Bayesian reinforcement-learning agent. We make explicit the conceptual differences in reward function under active inference and reinforcement learning through learning of prior preferences which enable the agent to settle into its niche. We highlight that from the perspective of reinforcement learning, this niche might be counter-intuitive i.e., reward minimising. We conclude with a brief discussion of how this formalism could be applied in (more complex) engineering ap- plications; e.g., robotic arm movement, Atari games, etc., if the appropriate underlying probability distribution or generative model can be formulated. 2 Active Inference Motivation Active inference describes how (biological or artiﬁcial) agents navigate dynamic, non- stationary environments [Friston et al., 2017a,b]. It postulates that agents maintain homeostasis by residing in (attracting) states that minimize surprise [Friston et al., 2011, Bogacz, 2017]. Deﬁnition 1 (Surprise). is deﬁned as the negative log probability of an outcome. For this, we introduce a random variable, o ∈O, that corresponds to a particular outcome 10 received by the agent and O is a ﬁnite set of all possible outcomes. S(o) = −log P(o) (1) where P denotes a probability distribution. In active inference, the agent determines how to minimize surprise by maintaining a generative model of the (partially observable) world. This is necessary because the agent does not have access to a ‘true’ measurement of its current state (i.e., the state of the actual generative process). Instead, it can only perceive itself and the world around via outcomes [Friston et al., 2017a,c]. This allows the problem to be framed as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) [Astrom, 1965], where the generative model allows us to make inferences about ‘true’ states given outcomes. In active inference, the agent makes choices based on its beliefs about these states of the world and not based on the value of the states [Friston et al., 2016]. This distinction is key: in standard model-based reinforcement learning frameworks the agent is interested in optimizing the value function of the states [Sutton et al., 1998]; i.e., making decisions that maximize expected value. In active inference, we are interested in optimizing a free energy functional of beliefs about states; i.e., making decisions that minimize expected free energy. Put even more simply, in reinforcement learning we are interested in resid- ing in high-value states under a reward function, whilst in active inference we wish to reside in states that give rise to outcomes that match our prior preferences (i.e., a target distribution). In one sense, this is a false distinction, as we could interpret a reward function as a log prior preference or vice versa. However, ensuring consistency with 11 a distribution is different to maximizing reward. The latter implies we try to spend all of our time in the most rewarding state, while the former nuances this with an impera- tive to spend time in states that generate outcomes proportionate to the prior probability associated with those outcomes. However, particular RL algorithms e.g., SMM [Lee et al., 2019], also optimize similar objectives of matching state marginal distributions to some target distribution. From an implementation perspective, this means replacing the traditional reward function used in reinforcement learning with prior beliefs about preferred outcomes. The agents prior preferences, log P(o), are deﬁned only to within an additive constant (i.e., a single negative or positive number). This means that the prior probability of an outcome is a softmax function of utility: P(o) = σ(U(o)) and therefore depends on rel- ative differences between rewarding [Chong et al., 2016] and unrewarding (surprising) outcomes. Additionally, by incorporating learning - over priors - active inference agent can be equipped with the ability to learn their own preferences over outcomes. Thereby, bypassing the need for an explicit reward signal from the environment and the agent to exhibit self-evidencing behavior (see Section 3). Variational Free Energy Starting from a simple generative model for outcomes, it is possible to derive a varia- tional free energy formulation, as motivated by Figure 1; this gives the starting point for the full active inference derivation. First, we introduce the random variable, s ∈S, to represent a particular hidden state of the world, where S is a ﬁnite set of all possible (hidden) states. 12 Figure 1: Graphical representation of the generative process (based on true states, s∗) in the world and the corresponding (internal) generative model (based on probabilistic beliefs random variables, s, that stand in for true states that are hidden) that best explain the outcomes, o. This graphic, highlights that the outcomes are shared between the generative process and model. The generative model abstraction asserts that the world has a true (hidden) state s∗, which results in the outcomes o (via the generative process); s∗∈S. The agent correspondingly has an internal representation of (or distribution over) s, which it infers from o (via its generative model). The hidden state is a combination of features relevant to the agent (e.g., location, color, etc.) and the outcome is the information from the environment (e.g., feedback, velocity, reward, etc.). By the reverse process of mapping from its hidden state to the outcomes (through Bayesian model inversion), the agent can explain the outcomes in terms of how they were caused by hidden states. This is Bayesian model inversion or inference. Deﬁnition 2 (Generative Model). is deﬁned as a partially observable MDP that rests on the following (simpliﬁed) joint probability: P(o, s) where o ∈O and s ∈S as stated 13 previously. The joint probability can be factorized into a likelihood function P(o|s) and prior over internal states P(s) (see supplementary materials for a full speciﬁcation of the generative model): P(o, s) = P(o|s)P(s). (2) We know that for the agent to minimize its surprise, we need to marginalize over all possible states that could lead to a given outcome. This can be achieved by using the above factorization: P(o) = X s∈S P(o|s)P(s) (3) This is not a trivial task, since the dimensionality of the hidden state (and sequences of actions) space can be extremely large. Instead, we utilize a variational approximation of this quantity, P(o), which is tractable and allows us to estimate quantities of interest. Deﬁnition 3 (Variational free energy). Variational free energy, F, is deﬁned as the upper bound on surprise; deﬁnition 1. It is derived using Jensen’s inequality and com- monly, known as the (negative) evidence lower bound (ELBO) in the variational infer- ence literature [Blei et al., 2017]: −log P(o) = −log X s∈S P(o, s) (4) ≤− X s∈S Q(s) log P(o, s) Q(s) (5) = X s∈S Q(s) log Q(s) P(o, s) (6) Here, Q(.) is the variational distribution. 14 To make the link more concrete, we further manipulate the variational free energy quantity, F: F = X s∈S Q(s) log Q(s) P(o, s) (7) = X s∈S Q(s) log Q(s) P(s|o)P(o) (8) = X s∈S Q(s)  log Q(s) P(s|o) −log P(o)  (9) = DKL[Q(s)||P(s|o)] −log P(o) (10) By rearranging the last equation, the connection between surprise and variational free energy is made explicit: −log P(o) = F −DKL[Q(s)||P(s|o)] (11) Additionally, we can express variational free energy as a function of these posterior beliefs in many forms: F = DKL[Q(s|π)||P(s|o, π)] | {z } evidence bound −log P(o) | {z } log evidence (12) = DKL[Q(s|π)||P(s|π)] | {z } complexity −Es∼Q(s)[log P(o|s) | {z } accuracy ] (13) Since KL divergences cannot be less than zero, from Equation 12 we see that free energy is minimized when the approximate posterior becomes the true posterior. In that 15 instance, the free energy would simply be the negative log evidence for the generative model [Beal, 2003]. This shows that minimizing free energy is equivalent to maxi- mizing (generative) model evidence. In other words, it is minimizing the complexity of accurate explanations for observed outcomes, as seen in Equation 13. Note that we have conditioned the probabilities in Equation 12 and 13 on policies, π. These policies can be regarded as hypotheses about how to act that, as we will see below, pertain to probabilistic transitions among hidden states. For the moment, the introduction of poli- cies simply means that the variational free energy above can be evaluated for any given action sequence. Expected Free Energy Variational free energy gives us a way to perceive the environment (i.e., determine s from o), and addresses one part of the problem; namely, making inferences about the world (i.e., the ‘inference’ in active inference). However, the ‘active’ part of the formu- lation is still lacking; we have not accounted for the fact that the agent can take actions. To motivate this, we note that we would like to minimize not only our variational free energy F calculated from past and present observations, but also our expected free en- ergy G, which depends upon anticipated observations in the future. Minimization of expected free energy allows the agent to inﬂuence the future by taking actions in the present, which are selected from policies. We will ﬁrst consider the deﬁnition of a pol- icy, and later determine how to evaluate their likelihoods from the generative model, which ultimately leads to the action selected by the agent. 16 Deﬁnition 4 (Policy). is deﬁned as a sequence of actions at time, τ, that enable an agent to transition between hidden states; τ ∈[1, 2, ..., T], where T is the total number of time-steps in a given experiment under the generative model. For this, we introduce two random variables: 1) uτ ∈U to represent a particular action at time τ where U is a ﬁnite set of all possible actions, and 2) π ∈Π. to represent a particular policy, where Π is a ﬁnite set of allowable policies i.e., sequences of actions in the sense of sequential policy optimization; e.g., [Alagoz et al., 2010]. π = {u1, u2, ..., uτ} (14) up to a given time horizon, τ. The explicit link between policy and action is uτ = π(τ) (15) Remark 1 (Connections to state-action policies). From deﬁnition 4, in active inference a policy is simply a sequence of choices for actions through time i.e., a sequential policy. This contrasts with state-action policies in reinforcement learning, where πRL denotes a mapping of states to actions; e.g. [Bellman, 1952, Sutton, 1990] πRL(u, s) = P(u | s) The two policy types – sequential, π and state-action πRL – are equivalent, under a POMDP formulation, when τ = 1 i.e., π = {u1} [Friston et al., 2016]. Note that the Bayes–optimal policy is selected from these policies. For the remainder of the paper, a 17 policy (π) refers to sequential policy. To derive the expected free energy, we ﬁrst extend the variational free energy def- inition to be dependent on time (τ) and policy (π) (and present its matrix formulation: Equation 18): F(τ, π) = X sπτ Q(sτ|π)Q(sτ−1|π) log Q(sτ|π) P(oτ, sτ|sτ−1, π) (16) = EQ(sτ−1|π)  DKL[Q(sτ|π)||P(sτ|sτ−1, π)]  −EQ(sτ|π)  ln P(oτ|sτ)  (17) = sπ τ ·  log sπ τ −log Bπ τ−1sπ τ−1 −log A · oτ  (18) Here sπ τ is the expected state conditioned on each policy; Bπ τ is the transition probability for hidden states, contingent upon pursuing a given policy, at a particular time; A is the expected likelihood matrix mapping from hidden states to outcomes and oτ represents the outcomes. These are simply vectors (sπ τ) or matrices (Bπ τ and A) specifying a prob- ability for each alternative state or outcome. For the matrices each column corresponds to a different value to the variable we condition upon (here, hidden states), while rows give the probability of each hidden state at the next time or the outcome at the current time step, respectively. Now having developed this functional dependency on time, we simply take an expectation with respect to the posterior distribution of outcomes from our generative model, P(oτ|sτ). Deﬁnition 5 (Expected free energy). is deﬁned as a free energy functional of future trajectories, G. It effectively evaluates evidence for plausible policies based on out- comes that have yet to be observed [Parr and Friston, 2019a]. Heuristically, we can 18 obtain G from Equation 16 by making two moves. The ﬁrst is to include beliefs about future outcomes in the expectation; i.e., supplementing the expectation under the ap- proximate posterior with the likelihood, resulting in a predictive distribution given by P(oτ|sτ)Q(sτ|π). The second is to (implicitly or explicitly) condition the joint proba- bilities of states and observations in the generative model upon some desired state of affairs (C), as opposed to a speciﬁc policy. These two moves ensure (1) we can evaluate this quantity before the observations are obtained and (2) minimization of G encourages policies whose result is consistent with C 1. 1There are other ways in which we could consider constructing free energy functionals to deal with outcomes that have yet to be observed. While some of the alternatives are plausible from a theoretical perspective, they tend to dispense with aspects of observed behavior that we seek to capture and therefore do not apply to the kinds of system we are interested in here. For example, Millidge et al [Millidge et al., 2020b] propose an alternative that subtracts the conditional entropy of the likelihood (i.e., ambiguity) from the expected free energy shown here. This leads to agents who are less ambiguity averse, and do not seek information. As active inference deals with curious agents, we retain this ambiguity in the expected free energy functional. 19 G(τ, π) = X sτ,oτ P(oτ|sτ)Q(sτ|π)Q(sτ−1|π) log Q(sτ|π) P(oτ, sτ|sτ−1, C) (19) = E ˜Q [log(Q(sτ|π) −log(P(oτ, sτ|sτ−1, C))] (20) = E ˜Q [log(Q(sτ|π) −log(P(sτ|oτ, sτ−1)) −log(P(oτ|C))] (21) ≥E ˜Q [log(Q(sτ|π) −log(Q(sτ|oτ, sτ−1, π))] | {z } -ve mutual information −E ˜Q [log(P(oτ|C))] | {z } expected log evidence (22) = E ˜Q [log(Q(oτ|π) −log(Q(oτ|sτ, sτ−1, π))] | {z } -ve epistemic value −E ˜Q [log(P(oτ|C))] | {z } extrinsic value (23) = DKL[Q(oτ|π)||P(oτ|C)] | {z } expected cost + EQ(sτ|sτ−1,π) [H[P(oτ|sτ)]] | {z } expected ambiguity (24) = oπ τ · (oπ τ −Cτ) + sπ τ · H (25) where the following notation is used: ˜Q = P(oτ|sτ)Q(sτ|π); Q(oτ|sτ, π) = P(oτ|sτ); Cτ = log P(oτ|C) is the logarithm of prior preference over outcomes, oτ is the vector of posterior predictive outcomes (i.e., Asπ τ) and H = −diag  EQ[Ai,j]. EQ[A]  is the vector encoding the ambiguity over outcomes for each hidden state. When minimizing expected free energy, we can regard Equation 23 as capturing the imperative to maximize the amount of information gained, from observing the envi- ronment, about the hidden state (i.e., maximizing epistemic value), whilst maximizing expected value as scored by the (log) preferences (i.e., extrinsic value). This entails a clear trade-off: the former (epistemic) component promotes curious behavior, with exploration encouraged as the agent seeks out salient states to minimize uncertainty 20 about the environment, and the latter (pragmatic) component encourages exploitative behavior, through leveraging knowledge that enables policies to reach preferred out- comes. In other words, the expected free energy formulation enables active inference to treat exploration and exploitation as two different ways of tackling the same problem: minimizing uncertainty. This natural curiosity can be contrasted with handcrafted exploration in reinforce- ment learning schemes, where curiosity is replaced by random action selection [Mnih et al., 2013] or through the use of ad hoc novelty bonuses, which are appended to the reward function [Pathak et al., 2017]. Information theoretic approaches have also been explored in a reinforcement learning context e.g., [Still and Precup, 2012, Mohamed and Rezende, 2015, Blau et al., 2019]. Some of these approaches leverage beliefs about latent states [Blau et al., 2019, Sekar et al., 2020]. For example, Blau et al, [Blau et al., 2019] is a model-free algorithm that implicitly accounts for beliefs over the la- tent states. Additionally, Seker et al. [Sekar et al., 2020] is very close in its treatment of latent states to active inference but leverages an ensemble of belief states to inform epistemic exploration, rather than a true Bayesian posterior. Additionally, curiosity as formulated under active inference can emerge in reinforcement learning under POMDP formulations. Example algorithms may incorporate inductive biases [Igl et al., 2018] and uncertainty over state transitions or outcomes [Ross et al., 2008, Kolter and Ng, 2009, Zintgraf et al., 2019]. The key aspect of these belief-POMDP schemes is that they deal with belief states (i.e., a space of probability distributions over hidden states). This is crucial for exploration and minimizing uncertainty, because uncertainty is an attribute of a belief about hidden states, not the hidden states per se. 21 Normatively speaking, active inference dispenses with the Bellman optimality prin- ciple and replaces it with a (variational) principle of least action – please see [Friston et al., 2012] for further discussion. However, recent Bayesian RL schemes have used variational principles e.g. maintaining latent over the MDP [Zintgraf et al., 2019] or the explicit beliefs [Igl et al., 2019]. While in many of these settings, the distance between the two schools of thought may seem to be closing, a fundamental distinction-that has yet to be bridged-is the situation in which there are no rewards or, in active inference, when prior preferences are uninformative. In a scheme motivated by reward maximiza- tion, no meaningful behavior can be generated in this setting. This is not a criticism of such schemes, but a statement of their scope and the problems they are designed to solve. In contrast, the intrinsic value of seeking information-regardless of its potential to evince reward-in active inference means that in the absence of any rewarding out- comes, agents are still driven by a curiosity that helps them build a better model of their world. Furthermore, active inference agents can learn their priors over observations, and will exhibit ambiguity minimizing behavior in order to fulﬁll these prior expecta- tions [Friston et al., 2016]. In short, they can learn epistemic habits in the absence of extrinsic rewards. Equation 24 offers an alternative perspective on the same objective; i.e., an agent wishes to minimize the ambiguity and the degree to which outcomes (under a given policy) deviate from prior preferences P(oτ|C). Thus, ambiguity is the expectation of the conditional entropy — or uncertainty about outcomes — under the current policy. Low entropy suggests that outcomes are salient and uniquely informative about hidden states (e.g., visual cues in a well-lit environment — as opposed to the dark). In addition, 22 the agent would like to pursue policy dependent outcomes (Q(oτ|π)) that resemble its preferred outcomes (P(oτ|C)). This is achieved when the KL divergence between pre- dicted and preferred outcomes (i.e. expected cost) is minimized by a particular policy. Furthermore, prior beliefs about future outcomes equip the agent with goal-directed behavior (i.e. towards states they expect to occupy and frequent). It is now also possible to specify priors over policies using the expected free energy. Policies, a priori, minimize the expected free energy term, G [Friston et al., 2017a]. This has sometimes been framed in terms of a heuristic reductio ad absurdum argument that if selected policies realize prior beliefs and minimise free energy, then the only tenable prior beliefs are policies that will minimise free energy [Parr and Friston, 2019a]. If this were not true, then an active inference agent would not have prior belief that it selects policies that minimise expected free energy and it would infer (and pursue) policies that were not free energy minimising. As such, it would not be an active inference (i.e., free energy minimising) agent, which is a contradiction. This leads to the agents prior belief that it will select policies that minimise the free energy expected under that policy. There are some subtleties to this argument that leave some room for maneuver. Speciﬁcally, this does not tell us how to construct an expected free energy functional - but this is typically chosen to be consistent with Deﬁnition 5. This choice ensures both exploratory and exploitative behavior and is therefore sufﬁciently ﬂexible to deal with the kind of problem we are interested in for this paper. This can be realized by expressing the probability of any policy with a softmax 23 function (i.e., normalized exponential) of expected free energy: P(π) = σ[−β−1 · G(π)] (26) where σ denotes a softmax function and β is a temperature parameter. This illustrates the ‘self-evidencing’ behavior of active inference. Action sequences (policies) that result in lower expected free energy are more likely. Intuitively this makes sense; since all notions of how to act in the world (i.e., exploration, exploitation) are wrapped up in the expected free energy G, policy selection simply becomes a matter of determining (through search) the set of actions which get us closest to this goal (i.e., the attracting set deﬁned by prior preferences P(o|C)). Note the similarities to Dyna-style/planning model-based reinforcement learning [Sutton, 1990]: hypothetical roll-outs are used to model the consequences of each pol- icy. However, the actual controller in active inference is derived through an approach similar to model predictive control [Camacho and Alba, 2013], where a search is per- formed over possible action sequences at each time-step. Now that we have priors over policies, we can incorporate these into the generative model, and into the free energy. This gives: F = EQ(π)[F(π)] + DKL[Q(π)||P(π)] (27) Here, the free energy of the model conditioned upon the model plays the role of a negative log marginal likelihood, giving this the form of an accuracy and complexity term in the space of beliefs about policies. Often, the temperature parameter β is also 24 equipped with priors (normally using a gamma distribution) and posteriors, which add an additional complexity term to the free energy. Optimizing Free Energy From this free energy formulation, we can optimize expectations about hidden states, policies, and precision through inference, and optimize model parameters (likelihood, transition states) through learning (via a learning rate: η). This optimization requires ﬁnding sufﬁcient statistics of posterior beliefs that minimize variational free energy [Friston et al., 2017c]. Under variational Bayes, this would mean iterating the appro- priate formulations (for inference and learning) until convergence. Under the active inference scheme, we calculate the solution by using a gradient descent (with a default step size, ζ, of 4) on free energy F, which allows us to optimize both action-selection and inference simultaneously, using a mean-ﬁeld approximation [Beck et al., 2012, Parr et al., 2019]. The gradients of the negative free energy with respect to states and preci- sions, respectively, are επ τ = (log A · oτ + log Bπ τ−1sπ τ−1 + log Bπ τ · sπ τ+1) −log sπ τ (28) εγ = (β −βτ) + (π −π0) · G (29) where βτ = β + (π −π0).G; β = 1 γ encodes posterior beliefs about (inverse) pre- cision (i.e., temperature); π represents the policies specifying action sequences and π0 = σ(−γ.G). G in this equation is a vector whose elements are the expected free energies for each policy under consideration. 25 This involves converting the discrete updates, deﬁned in Equation 28 and 29, into dynamics for inference that minimize state and precision prediction errors: επ τ = −∂sF and εγ = −∂γF . These prediction errors are free energy gradients. Gradient ﬂows then produce posterior expectations that minimize free energy to provide Bayesian estimates of hidden variables. This particular optimization scheme means expectations about hidden variables are updated over several time scales. During each outcome or trial, beliefs about each policy is evaluated based upon prior beliefs about future outcomes - which get in through the expected free energy. This is determined by updating posterior beliefs about hidden states (i.e., state estimation under each policy, Q(s|π)) on a fast time scale, while posterior beliefs ﬁnd new extrema (i.e., as new outcomes are sampled, P(s|o, π)). These posterior beliefs are then used to compute the posterior predictive probabilities of future outcomes, Q(o|π), which themselves contribute to the expected free energy, and through this the priors over policies. This introduces an unusual feature of the online inference schemes under active inference rarely seen in Bayesian accounts - the priors over policies change with new outcomes. This is a key distinction between active inference and standard Bayesian RL perspectives, and can only occur when the best policies to engage in are functionals of beliefs which may be updated. Using this kind of belief updating, we can calculate the posterior beliefs about each policy; namely, a softmax function based on expected free energy and the likelihood of past observations under that policy (approximated with F(π)), extending the deﬁnition of the prior covered in Equation 26. The softmax function is a generalized sigmoid for vector input, and can, in a neurobiological setting, be regarded as a ﬁring rate function of neuronal depolarization [Friston et al., 2017b]. Having optimized posterior beliefs 26 about policies, they are used to form a Bayesian model average of the next outcome (i.e., under these beliefs about what I will do next, which observations would I expect on average), which is realized through action selected to conform to this. Practically, action selection is often achieved more simply by sampling from the distribution over actions at a given time implied by posterior beliefs about policies. In active inference, the scope and depth of the policy search is exhaustive, in the sense that any policy entertained by the agent is encoded explicitly, and any hidden state over the sequence of actions entailed by policy are continuously updated. How- ever, in practice, this can be computationally expensive; therefore, a policy is no longer evaluated if its log evidence is ζ (default 20) times less likely than the (current) most plausible policy. This, ζ, can be treated as an adjustable hyper-parameter. Additionally, at the end of each sequence of outcomes, the expected parameters are updated to allow for learning across trials. This is like Monte-Carlo reinforcement learning, where model parameters are updated at the end of each trial. Lastly, temporal discounting emerges naturally from active inference, where the generative model determines the nature of discounting (based on parameter capturing precision), with predictions in the distant future being less precise and thus discounted in a Bayes–optimal fashion [Friston et al., 2017a]. Practically, this involves the inclusion of a hyper-parameter β = γ−1 that can be regarded as the (inverse precision or temperature) of posterior beliefs over policies. This is marginalized out during belief updating; enabling the exploration-exploitation trade-off to be inferred. This highlights the ﬂexibility of active inference; in the sense it can be applied to any generative model. It is unclear how similar parameterizations could be adopted in conventional reinforcement learning, where optimizing temperature 27 parameters typically involves a grid search over value. Having said this, sophisticated formulations of reinforcement learning, e.g., soft actor-critic [Haarnoja et al., 2018, Cesa-Bianchi et al., 2017] have addressed this issue. The above discussion suggests that, from a generic generative model, we can derive Bayesian updates that clarify how perception, policy selection and actions shape beliefs about hidden states and subsequent outcomes in a dynamic (non-stationary) environ- ment. This formulation can be extended to capture a more representative generative process by deﬁning a hierarchical (deep temporal) generative model as described in [Friston et al., 2017a,c, Parr and Friston, 2017], continuous state spaces models [Buck- ley et al., 2017, Parr and Friston, 2019b, Ueltzh¨offer, 2018] or mixed models with both discrete and continuous states as described in [Friston et al., 2017c, Parr and Friston, 2018]. In the case of a continuous formulation, the generative model state-space can be deﬁned in terms of generalized coordinates of motion (i.e., the coefﬁcients of a Taylor series expansion in time - as opposed to a series of discrete time-steps), which generally have a non-linear mapping to the observed outcomes. Additionally, future work looks to evaluate how these formulations (agents) may interact with each other to emulate multi-agent exchanges. The implicit variational updates presented here have previously been used to sim- ulate a wide range of neuronal processing (using a gradient descent on variational free energy): ranging from single cell responses (including place-cell activity) [Fris- ton et al., 2017a], midbrain dopamine activity [Friston et al., 2014], to evoked poten- tials, including those associated with mismatch negative (MMN) paradigms [Friston et al., 2017a]. Additionally, there has been some evidence implicating these variational 28 inferences with neuromodulatory systems: action selection (dopaminergic), attention and expected uncertainty (cholinergic) and volatility and unexpected uncertainty (nora- drenergic) [Parr and Friston, 2017, 2019a]. Please see [Friston et al., 2017a, Parr and Friston, 2019a, Da Costa et al., 2020], for a detailed overview. In what follows, we provide a simple worked example to show precisely the behav- iors that emerge — naturally — under active inference. 3 Simulations This section considers inference using simulations of a modiﬁed version of OpenAI gym’s FrozenLake environment: for simplicity, we have chosen this paradigm (note that more complex simulations have been explored in the literature; e.g., behavioral economics trust games [Moutoussis et al., 2014, Schwartenbeck et al., 2015], narrative construction and reading [Friston et al., 2017b], saccadic searches and scene construc- tion [Mirza et al., 2016], Atari games [Cullen et al., 2018], etc). In closely related work, Cullen, et al [Cullen et al., 2018] demonstrated that active inference agents perform better in another OpenAI gym environment Doom, compared to reward-maximizing agents. Their reward-maximizing agents are active inference agents without the epis- temic value term (G) and can therefore be considered distinct from standard reinforce- ment learning agents. We ﬁrst describe the environment set-up and then simulate how an agent learns to navigate the lake to successfully reach the goal. The simulations involve searching for the reward (i.e., Frisbee) in a 3 × 3 frozen lake and avoid falling in a hole. The purpose 29 of these simulations is to provide an accessible overview – and accompanying code (see Software Note) – of the conceptual (and practical) differences between active inference and standard reinforcement learning. Set-up The frozen lake has a grid-like structure with four different patches: starting point (S), frozen surface (F), hole (H) and goal (G) where the Frisbee is located. All patches, except for (H), are safe. The agent starts each episode at (S); position 1. From there, to reach the Frisbee location, the agent needs to take a series of actions; e.g. left, right, down or up. The agent is allowed to continue moving around the frozen lake, with multiple revisits to the same positions, but each episode ends when either (H) or (G) is visited. (G) and (H) can be located in one of two locations: position 8 and 6 or 6 and 8 respectively. The objective is to reach (G), the Frisbee location, ideally in as few steps as possible, whilst avoiding the hole (H). If the agent is able to reach the Frisbee without falling in the hole, it receives a score of 100 at the end of trial. This scoring metric is framework agnostic and allows us to compare active inference to reinforcement learning methods. However, it is important to note that maximizing reward is not the deﬁnition of Bayes–optimal behavior for an active inference agent, where information gain is also of value. This will become important later. Finally, we limit the maximum number of time steps (i.e., the horizon) to 15. 30 Figure 2: Graphical representation of the active inference generative model: The model contains four action states that encode direction of movement: right, down, up and left. They control the ability to transition between hidden state location factors (one of the nine locations going from 1 →9 - only a few states are shown). Each action navigates the agent to a different location (a select few are shown): e.g., if the agent starts in position 1 and chooses to turn right, then it will end up in state 2 at the next time–step. However, if the agent started in location 5, and goes up, it would end up in location 2 instead. Note that both 8 and 6 are absorbing states: only 8 is denoted as such by the circular arrow. Additionally, if an agent makes an improbable move; i.e., tries to go left from location 1, it will remain in location 1 (as shown). The hidden s
