---
id: 433
url: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/amazon-bedrock-knowledge-bases-now-supports-metadata-filtering-to-improve-retrieval-accuracy/
title: Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases now supports metadata filtering to improve retrieval
  accuracy | Artificial Intelligence
domain: aws.amazon.com
source_date: '2025-05-26'
tags:
- ai
- llm
- database
- devops
summary: Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases now supports metadata filtering, allowing
  users to pre-filter document retrievals based on custom metadata attributes (such
  as dates, categories, or tags) before semantic search. This feature improves retrieval
  accuracy and reduces costs by narrowing search results to relevant document subsets,
  particularly useful for disambiguating queries when multiple documents share similar
  content but different contexts—such as legal documents or movies from different
  years. The metadata filtering capability is available in US East and US West regions
  and can be implemented through the AWS Management Console or SDK using conditions
  like "genres = Strategy AND year >= 2023."
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases now supports metadata filtering to improve retrieval accuracy | Artificial Intelligence

Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases now supports metadata filtering to improve retrieval accuracy At AWS re:Invent 2023, we announced the general availability of Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases . With Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases, you can securely connect foundation models (FMs) in Amazon Bedrock to your company data using a fully managed Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) model. For RAG-based applications, the accuracy of the generated responses from FMs depend on the context provided to the model. Contexts are retrieved from vector stores based on user queries. In the recently released feature for Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases, hybrid search , you can combine semantic search with keyword search. However, in many situations, you may need to retrieve documents created in a defined period or tagged with certain categories. To refine the search results, you can filter based on document metadata to improve retrieval accuracy, which in turn leads to more relevant FM generations aligned with your interests. In this post, we discuss the new custom metadata filtering feature in Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases, which you can use to improve search results by pre-filtering your retrievals from vector stores. Metadata filtering overview Prior to the release of metadata filtering, all semantically relevant chunks up to the pre-set maximum would be returned as context for the FM to use to generate a response. Now, with metadata filters, you can retrieve not only semantically relevant chunks but a well-defined subset of those relevant chunks based on applied metadata filters and associated values. With this feature, you can now supply a custom metadata file (each up to 10 KB) for each document in the knowledge base. You can apply filters to your retrievals, instructing the vector store to pre-filter based on document metadata and then search for relevant documents. This way, you have control over the retrieved documents, especially if your queries are ambiguous. For example, you can use legal documents with similar terms for different contexts, or movies that have a similar plot released in different years. In addition, by reducing the number of chunks that are being searched over, you achieve performance advantages like a reduction in CPU cycles and cost of querying the vector store, in addition to improvement in accuracy. To use the metadata filtering feature, you need to provide metadata files alongside the source data files with the same name as the source data file and .metadata.json suffix. Metadata can be string, number, or Boolean. The following is an example of the metadata file content: { "metadataAttributes" : { "tag" : "project EVE", "year" : 2016, "team": "ninjas" } } The metadata filtering feature of Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases is available in AWS Regions US East (N. Virginia) and US West (Oregon). The following are common use cases for metadata filtering: Document chatbot for a software company – This allows users to find product information and troubleshooting guides. Filters on the operating system or application version, for example, can help avoid retrieving obsolete or irrelevant documents. Conversational search of an organization’s application – This allows users to search through documents, kanbans, meeting recording transcripts, and other assets. Using metadata filters on work groups, business units, or project IDs, you can personalize the chat experience and improve collaboration. An example would be, “What is the status of project Sphinx and risks raised,” where users can filter documents for a specific project or source type (such as email or meeting documents). Intelligent search for software developers – This allows developers to look for information of a specific release. Filters on the release version, document type (such as code, API reference, or issue) can help pinpoint relevant documents. Solution overview In the following sections, we demonstrate how to prepare a dataset to use as a knowledge base, and then query with metadata filtering. You can query using either the AWS Management Console or SDK. Prepare a dataset for Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases For this post, we use a sample dataset about fictional video games to illustrate how to ingest and retrieve metadata using Amazon Bedrock Knowledge Bases. If you want to follow along in your own AWS account, download the file. If you want to add metadata to your documents in an existing knowledge base, create the metadata files with the expected filename and schema, then skip to the step to sync your data with the knowledge base to start the incremental ingestion. In our sample dataset, each game’s document is a separate CSV file (for example, s3://$bucket_name/video_game/$game_id.csv ) with the following columns: title , description , genres , year , publisher , score Each game’s metadata has the suffix .metadata.json (for example, s3://$bucket_name/video_game/$game_id.csv.metadata.json ) with the following schema: { "metadataAttributes": { "ids": number, "genres": string, "year": number, "publisher": string, "score": number } } Create a knowledge base for Amazon Bedrock For instructions to create a new knowledge base, see Create a knowledge base . For this example, we use the following settings: On the Set up data source page, under Chunking strategy , select No chunking , because you’ve already preprocessed the documents in the previous step. In the Embeddings model section, choose Titan G1 Embeddings – Text . In the Vector database section, choose Quick create a new vector store . The metadata filtering feature is available for all supported vector stores. Synchronize the dataset with the knowledge base After you create the knowledge base, and your data files and metadata files are in an Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3) bucket, you can start the incremental ingestion. For instructions, see Sync to ingest your data sources into the knowledge base . Query with metadata filtering on the Amazon Bedrock console To use the metadata filtering options on the Amazon Bedrock console, complete the following steps: On the Amazon Bedrock console, choose Knowledge bases in the navigation pane. Choose the knowledge base you created. Choose Test knowledge base . Choose the Configurations icon, then expand Filters . Enter a condition using the format: key = value (for example, genres = Strategy) and press Enter . To change the key, value, or operator, choose the condition. Continue with the remaining conditions (for example, (genres = Strategy AND year >= 2023) OR (rating >= 9)) When finished, enter your query in the message box, then choose Run . For this post, we enter the query “A strategy game with cool graphic released after 2023.” Query with metadata filtering using the SDK To use the SDK, first create the client for the Amazon Bedrock Agents runtime: import boto3 bedrock_agent_runtime = boto3.client( service_name = "bedrock-agent-runtime" ) Then construct the filter (the following are some examples): # genres = Strategy single_filter= { "equals": { "key": "genres", "value": "Strategy" } } # genres = Strategy AND year >= 2023 one_group_filter= { "andAll": [ { "equals": { "key": "genres", "value": "Strategy" } }, { "GreaterThanOrEquals": { "key": "year", "value": 2023 } } ] } # (genres = Strategy AND year >=2023) OR score >= 9 two_group_filter = { "orAll": [ { "andAll": [ { "equals": { "key": "genres", "value": "Strategy" } }, { "GreaterThanOrEquals": { "key": "year", "value": 2023 } } ] }, { "GreaterThanOrEquals": { "key": "score", "value": "9" } } ] } Pass the filter to retrievalConfiguration of the Retrieval API or RetrieveAndGenerate API: retrievalConfiguration={ "vectorSearchConfiguration": { "filter": metadata_filter } } The following table lists a few responses with different metadata filtering conditions. Query Metadata Filtering Retrieved Documents Observations “A strategy game with cool graphic released after 2023” Off * Viking Saga: The Sea Raider, year:2023, genres: Strategy * Medieval Castle: Siege and Conquest, year: 2022 , genres: Strategy * Fantasy Kingdoms: Chronicles of Eldoria, year:2023, genres: Strategy * Cybernetic Revolution: Rise of the Machines, year: 2022 , genres: Strategy * Steampunk Chronicles: Clockwork Empires, year: 2021 , genres: City-Building 2/5 games meet the condition (genres = Strategy and year >= 2023) On * Viking Saga: The Sea Raider, year:2023, genres: Strategy * Fantasy Kingdoms: Chronicles of Eldoria, year:2023, genres: Strategy 2/2 games meet the condition (genres = Strategy and year >= 2023) In addition to custom metadata, you can also filter using S3 prefixes (which is a built-in metadata, so you don’t need to provide any metadata files). For example, if you organize the game documents into prefixes by publisher (for example, s3://$bucket_name/video_game/$publisher/$game_id.csv ), you can filter with the specific publisher (for example, neo_tokyo_games ) using the following syntax: publisher_filter = { "startsWith": { "key": "x-amz-bedrock-kb-source-uri", "value": "s3://$bucket_name/video_game/neo_tokyo_games/" } } Clean up To clean up your resources, complete the following steps: Delete the knowledge base: On the Amazon Bedrock console, choose Knowledge bases under Orchestration in the navigation pane. Choose the knowledge base you created. Take note of the AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) service role name in the Knowledge base overview section. In the Vector database section, take note of the collection ARN. Choose Delete , then enter delete to confirm. Delete the vector database: On the Amazon OpenSearch Service console, choose Collections under Serverless in the navigation pane. Enter the collection ARN you saved in the search bar. Select the collection and chose Delete . Enter confirm in the confirmation prompt, then choose Delete . Delete the IAM service role: On the IAM console, choose Roles in the navigation pane. Search for the role name you noted earlier. Select the role and c
