---
id: 15
url: http://scheme2006.cs.uchicago.edu/11-ghuloum.pdf
title: An Incremental Approach to Compiler Construction
domain: scheme2006.cs.uchicago.edu
source_date: '2026-01-10'
tags:
- compilers
- scheme
- academic-paper
- tutorial
summary: This paper presents an incremental approach to teaching compiler construction
  by building a working Scheme compiler that generates Intel x86 assembly code. Rather
  than presenting compiler theory in abstract terms or jumping between simplified
  toy examples and complex industrial compilers, the author breaks compiler development
  into small, manageable steps where each iteration produces a fully functional compiler
  for an expanding subset of Scheme. The key takeaway is that compiler construction
  can be made accessible to novices by using a concrete, practical methodology with
  immediate, executable results at each stage.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# An Incremental Approach to Compiler Construction

An Incremental Approach to Compiler Construction Abdulaziz Ghuloum Department of Computer Science, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN 47408 aghuloum@cs.indiana.edu Abstract Compilers are perceived to be magical artifacts, carefully crafted by the wizards, and unfathomable by the mere mortals. Books on compilers are better described as wizard-talk: written by and for a clique of all-knowing practitioners. Real-life compilers are too complex to serve as an educational tool. And the gap between real-life compilers and the educational toy compilers is too wide. The novice compiler writer stands puzzled facing an impenetrable barrier, “better write an interpreter instead.” The goal of this paper is to break that barrier. We show that building a compiler can be as easy as building an interpreter. The compiler we construct accepts a large subset of the Scheme pro- gramming language and produces assembly code for the Intel-x86 architecture, the dominant architecture of personal computing. The development of the compiler is broken into many small incremen- tal steps. Every step yields a fully working compiler for a progres- sively expanding subset of Scheme. Every compiler step produces real assembly code that can be assembled then executed directly by the hardware. We assume that the reader is familiar with the basic computer architecture: its components and execution model. Detailed knowledge of the Intel-x86 architecture is not required. The development of the compiler is described in detail in an extended tutorial. Supporting material for the tutorial such as an automated testing facility coupled with a comprehensive test suite are provided with the tutorial. It is our hope that current and future implementors of Scheme ﬁnd in this paper the motivation for de- veloping high-performance compilers and the means for achieving that goal. Categories and Subject Descriptors D.3.4 [Processors]: Compil- ers; K.3.2 [Computer and Information Science Education]: Com- puter science education Keywords Scheme, Compilers 1. Introduction Compilers have traditionally been regarded as complex pieces of software. The perception of complexity stems mainly from tradi- tional methods of teaching compilers as well as the lack of available examples of small and functional compilers for real languages. Compiler books are polarized into two extremes. Some of them focus on “educational” toy compilers while the others focus on “industrial-strength” optimizing compilers. The toy compilers are Proceedings of the 2006 Scheme and Functional Programming Workshop University of Chicago Technical Report TR-2006-06 too simplistic and do not prepare the novice compiler writer to construct a useful compiler. The source language of these compilers often lacks depth and the target machine is often ﬁctitious. Niklaus Wirth states that “to keep both the resulting compiler reasonably simple and the development clear of details that are of relevance only for a speciﬁc machine and its idiosyncrasies, we postulate an architecture according to our own choice”[20]. On the other extreme, advanced books focus mainly on optimization techniques, and thus target people who are already well-versed in the topic. There is no gradual progress into the ﬁeld of compiler writing. The usual approach to introducing compilers is by describing the structure and organization of a ﬁnalized and polished compiler. The sequencing of the material as presented in these books mirrors the passes of the compilers. Many of the issues that a compiler writer has to be aware of are solved beforehand and only the ﬁnal solution is presented. The reader is not engaged in the process of developing the compiler. In these books, the sequential presentation of compiler imple- mentation leads to loss of focus on the big picture. Too much focus is placed on the individual passes of the compiler; thus the reader is not actively aware of the relevance of a single pass to the other passes and where it ﬁts in the whole picture. Andrew Appel states that “a student who implements all the phases described in Part I of the book will have a working compiler”[2]. Part I of Appel’s book concludes with a 6-page chapter on “Putting it all together” after presenting 11 chapters on the different passes of Tiger. Moreover, practical topics such as code generation for a real machine, interfacing to the operating system or to other languages, heap allocation and garbage collection, and the issues surround- ing dynamic languages are either omitted completely or placed in an appendix. Muchnick states that “most of the compiler ma- terial in this book is devoted to languages that are well suited for compilation: languages that have static, compile-time type systems, that do not allow the user to incrementally change the code, and that typically make much heavier use of stack storage than heap storage”[13]. 2. Preliminary Issues To develop a compiler, there are a few decisions to be made. The source language, the implementation language, and the target architecture must be selected. The development time frame must be set. The development methodology and the ﬁnal goal must be decided. For the purpose of our tutorial, we made the decisions presented below. 2.1 Our Target Audience We do not assume that the reader knows anything about assem- bly language beyond the knowledge of the computer organization, memory, and data structures. The reader is assumed to have very limited or no experience in writing compilers. Some experience with writing simple interpreters is helpful, but not required. 27 We assume that the reader has basic knowledge of C and the C standard library (e.g. malloc, printf, etc.). Although our com- piler will produce assembly code, some functionality is easier to implement in C; implementing it directly as assembly routines dis- tracts the reader from the more important tasks. 2.2 The Source Language In our tutorial, we choose a subset of Scheme as the source pro- gramming language. The simple and uniform syntax of Scheme obviates the need for a lengthy discussion of scanners and parsers. The execution model of Scheme, with strict call-by-value evalua- tion, simpliﬁes the implementation. Moreover, all of the Scheme primitives in the subset can be implemented in short sequences of assembly instructions. Although not all of Scheme is implemented in the ﬁrst compiler, all the major compiler-related issues are tack- led. The implementation is a middle-ground between a full Scheme compiler and a toy compiler. In choosing a speciﬁc source language, we gain the advantage that the presentation is more concrete and eliminates the burden of making the connection from the abstract concepts to the actual language. 2.3 The Implementation Language Scheme is chosen as the implementation language of the compiler. Scheme’s data structures are simple and most Scheme program- mers are familiar with the basic tasks such as constructing and pro- cessing lists and trees. The ability to manipulate Scheme programs as Scheme data structures greatly simpliﬁes the ﬁrst steps of con- structing a compiler, since the issue of reading the input program is solved. Implementing a lexical-scanner and a parser are pushed to the end of the tutorial. Choosing Scheme as the implementation language also elimi- nates the need for sophisticated and specialized tools. These tools add a considerable overhead to the initial learning process and dis- tracts the reader from acquiring the essential concepts. 2.4 Choosing The Target Architecture We choose the Intel-x86 architecture as our target platform. The x86 architecture is the dominant architecture on personal comput- ers and thus is widely available. Talking about compilers that are detached from a particular architecture puts the burden on the reader to make the connection from the abstract ideas to the concrete machine. Novice compiler writers are unlikely to be able to derive the connection on their own. Additionally, the compiler we develop is small enough to be easily portable to other architectures, and the majority of the compiler passes are platform independent. 2.5 Development Time Frame The development of the compiler must proceed in small steps where every step can be implemented and tested in one sitting. Fea- tures that require many sittings to complete are broken down into smaller steps. The result of completing every step is a fully working compiler. The compiler writer, therefore, achieves progress in every step in the development. This is in contrast with the traditional de- velopment strategies that advocate developing the compiler as a se- ries of passes only the last of which gives the sense of accomplish- ment. With our approach of incremental development, where every step results in a fully working compiler for some subset of Scheme, the risk of not “completing” the compiler is minimized. This ap- proach is useful for people learning about compilers on their own, where the amount of time they can dedicate constantly changes. It is also useful in time-limited settings such as an academic semester. 2.6 Development Methodology We advocate the following iterative development methodology: 1. Choose a small subset of the source language that we can compile directly to assembly. 2. Write as many test cases as necessary to cover the chosen subset of the language. 3. Write a compiler that accepts an expression (in the chosen sub- set of the source language) and outputs the equivalent sequence of assembly instructions. 4. Ensure that the compiler is functional, i.e. it passes all the tests that are written beforehand. 5. Refactor the compiler, if necessary, making sure that none of the tests are broken due to incorrect refactoring. 6. Enlarge the subset of the language in a very small step and re- peat the cycle by writing more tests and extending the compiler to meet the newly-added requirements. A fully working compiler for the given subset of the language is available at every step in the development cycle starting from the ﬁrst day of development. The test cases are written to help en- sure that the implementation meets the speciﬁcations and to guard against bugs that may be introduced during the refactoring steps. Knowledge of compilation techniques as well as the target machine is built incrementally. The initial overhead of learning the assembly instructions of the target machine is eliminated—instructions are introduced only when they are needed. The compiler starts small and is well focused on translating the source language to assembly, and every incremental step reinforces that focus. 2.7 Testing Infrastructure The interface to the compiler is deﬁned by one Scheme procedure, compile-program, that takes as input an s-expression represent- ing a Scheme program. The output assembly is emitted using an emit form that routes the output of the compiler to an assembly ﬁle. Deﬁning the compiler as a Scheme procedure allows us to de- velop and debug the compiler interactively by inspecting the output assembly code. It also allows us to utilize an automated testing fa- cility. There are two core components of the testing infrastructure: the test-cases and the test-driver. The test cases are made of sample programs and their expected output. For example, the test cases for the primitive + may be deﬁned as follows: (test-section "Simple Addition") (test-case ’(+ 10 15) "25") (test-case ’(+ -10 15) "5") ... The test-driver iterates over the test cases performing the follow- ing actions: (1) The input expression is passed to compile-program to produce assembly code. (2) The assembly code and a minimal run-time system (to support printing) are assembled and linked to form an executable. (3) The executable is run and the output is compared to the expected output string. An error is signaled if any of the previous steps fails. 2.8 The End Goal For the purpose of this paper, we deﬁne the end goal to be writing a compiler powerful enough to compile an interactive evaluator. Building such a compiler forces us to solve many interesting prob- lems. 28 Scheme and Functional Programming, 2006 A large subset of Scheme’s core forms (lambda, quote, set!, etc) and extended forms (cond, case, letrec, internal define etc.) must be supported by the compiler. Although most of these forms are not essential, their presence allows us to write our pro- grams in a more natural way. In implementing the extended forms, we show how a large number of syntactic forms can be added with- out changing the core language that the compiler supports. A large collection of primitives (cons, car, vector?, etc.) and library procedures (map, apply, list->vector, etc.) need to be implemented. Some of these library procedures can be im- plemented directly, while others require some added support from the compiler. For example, some of the primitives cannot be im- plemented without supporting variable-arity procedures, and others require the presence of apply. Implementing a writer and a reader requires adding a way to communicate with an external run-time system. 3. Writing a Compiler in 24 Small Steps Now that we described the development methodology, we turn our attention to the actual steps taken in constructing a compiler. This section is a brief description of 24 incremental stages: the ﬁrst is a small language composed only of small integers, and the last covers most of the requirements of R5RS. A more detailed presentation of these stages is in the accompanying extended tutorial. 3.1 Integers The simplest language that we can compile and test is composed of the ﬁxed-size integers, or ﬁxnums. Let’s write a small compiler that takes a ﬁxnum as input and produces a program in assembly that returns that ﬁxnum. Since we don’t know yet how to do that, we ask for some help from another compiler that does know: gcc. Let’s write a small C function that returns an integer: int scheme_entry(){ return 42; } Let’s compile it using gcc -O3 --omit-frame-pointer -S test.c and see the output. The most relevant lines of the output ﬁle are the following: 1. .text 2. .p2align 4,,15 3. .globl scheme_entry 4. .type scheme_entry, @function 5. scheme_entry: 6. movl $42, %eax 7. ret Line 1 starts a text segment, where code is located. Line 2 aligns the beginning of the procedure at 4-byte boundaries (not important at this point). Line 3 informs the assembler that the scheme entry label is global so that it becomes visible to the linker. Line 4 says that scheme entry is a function. Line 5 denotes the start of the scheme entry procedure. Line 6 sets the value of the %eax register to 42. Line 7 returns control to the caller, which expects the received value to be in the %eax register. Generating this ﬁle from Scheme is straightforward. Our com- piler takes an integer as input and prints the given assembly with the input substituted in for the value to be returned. (define (compile-program x) (emit "movl $~a, %eax" x) (emit "ret")) To test our implementation, we write a small C run-time system that calls our scheme entry and prints the value it returns: /* a simple driver for scheme_entry */ #include <stdio.h> int main(int argc, char** argv){ printf("%d\n", scheme_entry()); return 0; } 3.2 Immediate Constants Values in Scheme are not limited to the ﬁxnum integers. Booleans, characters, and the empty list form a collection of immediate val- ues. Immediate values are those that can be stored directly in a machine word and therefore do not require additional storage. The types of the immediate objects in Scheme are disjoint, conse- quently, the implementation cannot use ﬁxnums to denote booleans or characters. The types must also be available at run time to al- low the driver to print the values appropriately and to allow us to provide the type predicates (discussed in the next step). One way of encoding the type information is by dedicating some of the lower bits of the machine word for type information and using the rest of the machine word for storing the value. Every type of value is deﬁned by a mask and a tag. The mask deﬁnes which bits of the integer are used for the type information and the tag deﬁnes the value of these bits. For ﬁxnums, the lower two bits (mask = 11b) must be 0 (tag = 00b). This leaves 30 bits to hold the value of a ﬁxnum. Characters are tagged with 8 bits (tag = 00001111b) leaving 24 bits for the value (7 of which are actually used to encode the ASCII characters). Booleans are given a 7-bit tag (tag = 0011111b), and 1-bit value. The empty list is given the value 00101111b. We extend our compiler to handle the immediate types appro- priately. The code generator must convert the different immediate values to the corresponding machine integer values. (define (compile-program x) (define (immediate-rep x) (cond ((integer? x) (shift x fixnum-shift)) ...)) (emit "movl $~a, %eax" (immediate-rep x)) (emit "ret")) The driver must also be extended to handle the newly-added values. The following code illustrates the concept: #include <stdio.h> #define fixnum_mask 3 #define fixnum_tag 0 #define fixnum_shift 2 ... int main(int argc, char** argv){ int val = scheme_entry(); if((val & fixnum_mask) == fixnum_tag){ printf("%d\n", val >> fixnum_shift); } else if(val == empty_list){ printf("()\n"); } ... return 0; } 3.3 Unary Primitives We extend the language now to include calls to primitives that ac- cept one argument. We start with the simplest of these primitives: add1 and sub1. To compile an expression in the form (add1 e), we ﬁrst emit the code for e. That code would evaluate e placing its value in the %eax register. What remains to be done is incrementing Scheme and Functional Programming, 2006 29 the value of the %eax register by 4 (the shifted value of 1). The ma- chine instruction that performs addition/subtraction is addl/subl. (define (emit-expr x) (cond ((immediate? x) (emit "movl $~a, %eax" (immediate-rep x))) ((primcall? x) (case (primcall-op x) ((add1) (emit-expr (primcall-operand1 x)) (emit "addl $~a, %eax" (immediate-rep 1))) ...)) (else ...))) The primitives integer->char and char->integer can be added next. To convert an integer (assuming it’s in the proper range) to a character, the integer (already shifted by 2 bits) is shifted further 6 bits to make up a total of char-shift, the result is then tagged with the char-tag. Converting a character to a ﬁxnum requires a shift to the right by 6 bits. The choice of tags for the ﬁxnums and characters is important for realizing this concise and potentially fast conversion. We implement the predicates null?, zero?, and not next. There are many possible ways of implementing each of these pred- icates. The following sequence works for zero? (assuming the value of the operand is in %eax): 1. cmpl $0, %eax 2. movl $0, %eax 3. sete %al 4. sall $7, %eax 5. orl $63, %eax Line 1 compares the value of %eax to 0. Line 2 zeros the value of %eax. Line 3 sets %al, the low byte of %eax, to 1 if the two compared values were equal, and to 0 otherwise. Lines 4 and 5 construct the appropriate boolean value from the one bit in %eax. The predicates integer? and boolean? are handled similarly with the exception that the tag of the value must be extracted (using andl) before it is compared to the ﬁxnum/boolean tag. 3.4 Binary Primitives Calls to binary, and higher-arity, primitives cannot in general be evaluated using a single register since evaluating one subexpression may overwrite the value computed for the other subexpression. To implement binary primitives (such as +, *, char<?, etc.), we use a stack to save intermediate values of computations. For example, generating the code for (+ e0 e1) is achieved by (1) emitting the code for e1, (2) emitting an instruction to save the value of %eax on the stack, (3) emitting the code for e0, and (4) adding the value of %eax to the value saved on the stack. The stack is arranged as a contiguous array of memory loca- tions. A pointer to the base of the stack is in the %esp register. The base of the stack, 0(%esp), contains the return-point. The return- point is an address in memory where we return after computing the value and therefore should not be modiﬁed. We are free to use the memory locations above the return-point (-4(%esp), -8(%esp), -12(%esp), etc.) to hold our intermediate values. In order to guarantee never overwriting any value that will be needed after the evaluation of an expression, we arrange the code generator to maintain the value of the stack index. The stack index is a negative number that points to the ﬁrst stack location that is free. The value of the stack index is initialized to −4 and is decremented by 4 (the word-size, 4 bytes) every time a new value is saved on the stack. The following segment of code illustrates how the primitive + is implemented: (define (emit-primitive-call x si) (case (primcall-op x) ((add1) ...) ((+) (emit-expr (primcall-operand2 x) si) (emit "movl %eax, ~a(%esp)" si) (emit-expr (primcall-operand1 x) (- si wordsize)) (emit "addl ~a(%esp), %eax" si)) ...)) The other primitives (-, *, =, <, char=?, etc.) can be easily implemented by what we know so far. 3.5 Local Variables Now that we have a stack, implementing let and local variables is straightforward. All local variables will be saved on the stack and an environment mapping variables to stack locations is main- tained. When the code generator encounters a let-expression, it ﬁrst evaluates the right-hand-side expressions, one by one, saving the value of each in a speciﬁc stack location. Once all the right- hand-sides are evaluated, the environment is extended to associate the new variables with their locations, and code for the body of the let is generated in the new extended environment. When a refer- ence to a variable is encountered, the code generator locates the variable in the environment, and emits a load from that location. (define (emit-expr x si env) (cond ((immediate? x) ...) ((variable? x) (emit "movl ~a(%esp), %eax" (lookup x env))) ((let? x) (emit-let (bindings x) (body x) si env)) ((primcall? x) ...) ...)) (define (emit-let bindings body si env) (let f ((b* bindings) (new-env env) (si si)) (cond ((null? b*) (emit-expr body si new-env)) (else (let ((b (car b*))) (emit-expr (rhs b) si env) (emit "movl %eax, ~a(%esp)" si) (f (cdr b*) (extend-env (lhs b) si new-env) (- si wordsize))))))) 3.6 Conditional Expressions Conditional evaluation is simple at the assembly-level. The sim- plest implementation of (if test conseq altern) is: (define (emit-if test conseq altern si env) (let ((L0 (unique-label)) (L1 (unique-label))) (emit-expr test si env) (emit-cmpl (immediate-rep #f) eax) (emit-je L0) (emit-expr conseq si env) (emit-jmp L1) (emit-label L0) (emit-expr altern si env) (emit-label L1))) The code above ﬁrst evaluates the test expression and compares the result to the false value. Control is transferred to the alternate 30 Scheme and Functional Programming, 2006 ap field3 field2 low address high address … %esi+8 %esi+4 field1 %esi free heap space used space ap low address high address … %esi+8 %esi+4 %esi free heap space used space (A) Before allocation (B) After allocation Figure 1. Illustration of the heap. The allocation pointer (ap) is is held in the %esi register and its value is always aligned on 8-byte boundaries. Individual objects are allocated at address %esi and the allocation pointer is bumped to the ﬁrst boundary after the object. code if the value of the test was false, otherwise, it falls through to the consequent. 3.7 Heap Allocation Scheme’s pairs, vector, strings, etc. do not ﬁt in one machine word and must be allocated in memory. We allocate all objects from one contiguous area of memory. The heap is preallocated at the start of the program and its size is chosen to be large enough to accommodate our current needs. A pointer to the beginning of the heap is passed to scheme entry to serve as the allocation pointer. We dedicate one register, %esi, to hold the allocation pointer. Every time an object is constructed, the value of %esi is incremented according to the size of the object. The types of the objects must also be distinguishable from one another. We use a tagging scheme similar to the one used for ﬁxnums, booleans, and characters. Every pointer to a heap- allocated object is tagged by a 3-bit tag (001b for pairs, 010b for vectors, 011b for strings, 101b for symbols, and 110b for closures; 000b, 100b and 111b were already used for ﬁxnums and the other immediate objects). For this tagging scheme to work, we need to guarantee that the lowest three bits of every heap-allocated object is 000b so that the tag and the value of the pointer do not interfere. This is achieved by always allocating objects at double-word (or 8-byte) boundaries. Let’s consider how pairs are implemented ﬁrst. A pair requires two words of memory to hold its car and cdr ﬁelds. A call to (cons 10 20) can be translated to: movl $40, 0(%esi) # set the car movl $80, 4(%esi) # set the cdr movl %esi, %eax # eax = esi | 1 orl $1, %eax addl $8, %esi # bump esi The primitives car and cdr are simple; we only need to re- member that the pointer to the pair is its address incremented by 1. Consequently, the car and cdr ﬁelds are located at −1 and 3 from the pointer. For example, the primitive caddr translates to: movl 3(%eax), %eax # cdr movl 3(%eax), %eax # cddr movl -1(%eax), %eax # caddr Vectors and strings are different from pairs in that they vary in length. This has two implications: (1) we must reserve one extra memory location in the vector/string to hold the length, and (2) after allocating the object, the allocation pointer must be aligned to the next double-word boundary (allocating pairs was ﬁne because their size is a multiple of 8). For example, a call to the primitive make-vector translates to: movl %eax, 0(%esi) # set the length movl %eax, %ebx # save the length movl %esi, %eax # eax = esi | 2 orl $2, %eax addl $11, %ebx # align size to next andl $-8, %ebx # object boundary addl %ebx, %esi # advance alloc ptr Strings are implemented similarly except that the size of a string is smaller than the size of a vector of the same length. The primitive string-ref (and string-set!) must also take care of converting a byte value to a character (and vise versa). 3.8 Procedure Calls The implementation of procedures and procedure calls are perhaps the hardest aspect of constructing our compiler. The reason for its difﬁculty is that Scheme’s lambda form performs more than one task and the compiler must tease these tasks apart. First, a lambda expression closes over the variables that occur free in its body so we must perform some analysis to determine the set of variables that are referenced, but not deﬁned, in the body of a lambda. Second, lambda constructs a closure object that can be passed around. Third, the notion of procedure calls and parameter-passing must be introduced at the same point. We’ll handle these issues one at a time starting with procedure calls and forgetting all about the other issues surrounding lambda. We extend the language accepted by our code generator to con- tain top-level labels (each bound to a code expression containing a list of formal parameters and a body expression) and label calls. <Prog> ::= (labels ((lvar <LExpr>) ...) <Expr>) <LExpr> ::= (code (var ...) <Expr>) <Expr> ::= immediate | var | (if <Expr> <Expr> <Expr>) | (let ((var <Expr>) ...) <Expr>) | (primcall prim-name <Expr> ...) | (labelcall lvar <Expr> ...) base locals outgoing arguments return point local1 local2 local3 arg1 arg2 low address high address … %esp %esp-4 %esp-8 %esp-12 %esp-16 %esp-20 %esp-24 arg3 %esp-28 free stack space base incoming arguments return point arg1 arg2 low address high address … %esp %esp-4 %esp-8 arg3 %esp-12 free stack space (A) Caller’s View (B) Callee’s View Figure 2. The view of the stack from (A) the Caller’s side before making the procedure call, and (B) the Callee’s side on entry to the procedure. Scheme and Functional Programming, 2006 31 Code generation for the new forms is as follows: • For the labels form, a new set of unique labels are created and the initial environment is constructed to map each of the lvars to its corresponding label. • For each code expression, the label is ﬁrst emitted, followed by the code of the body. The environment used for the body contains, in addition to the lvars, a mapping of each of the formal parameters to the ﬁrst set of stack locations (−4, −8, etc.). The stack index used for evaluating the body starts above the last index used for the formals. • For a (labelcall lvar e ...), the arguments are evaluated and their values are saved in consecutive stack locations, skip- ping one location to be used for the return-point. Once all of the arguments are evaluated, the value of the stack-pointer, %esp is incremented to point to one word below the return-point. A call to the label associated with the lvar is issued. A call instruction decrements the value of %esp by 4 and saves the ad- dress of the next instruction in the appropriate return-point slot. Once the called procedure returns (with a value in %eax), the stack pointer is adjusted back to its initial position. Figure 2 illustrates the view of the stack from the caller and callee perspective. 3.9 Closures Implementing closures on top of what we have so far should be straightforward. First, we modify the language accepted by our code generator as follows: • The form (closure lvar var ...) is added to the lan- guage. This form is responsible for constructing closures. The ﬁrst cell of a closure contains the label of a procedure, and the remaining cells contain the values of the free variables. • The code form is extended to contain a list of the free variables in addition to the existing formal parameters. • The labelcall is replaced by a funcall form that takes an arbitrary expression as a ﬁrst argument instead of an lvar. The closure form is similar to a call to vector. The label associated with the lvar is stored at 0(%esi) and the values of the variables are stored in the next locations. The value of %esi is tagged to get the value of the closure, and %esi is bumped by the required amount. The code form, in addition to associating the formals with the corresponding stack locations, associates each of the free variables with their displacement form the closure pointer %edi. The funcall evaluated all the arguments as before but skips not one but two stack locations: one to be used to save the current value of the closure pointer, and one for the return point. After the arguments are evaluated and saved, the operator is evaluated, and its value is moved to %edi (whose value must be saved to its stack location). The value of %esp is adjusted and an indirect call through the ﬁrst cell of the closure pointer is issued. Upon return from the call, the value of %esp is adjusted back and the value of %edi is restored from the location at which it was saved. One additional problem needs to be solved. The source lan- guage that our compiler accepts has a lambda form, and none of the labels, code, closure forms. So, Scheme input must be con- verted to this form before our code generator can accept it. The conversion is easy to do in two steps: 1. Free-variable analysis is performed. Every lambda expression appearing in the source program is annotated with the set of variables that are referenced but not deﬁned in the body of the lambda. For example, base locals outgoing arguments return point local1 local2 local3 arg1 arg2 arg3 low address high address … %esp %esp-4 %esp-8 %esp-12 %esp-16 %esp-20 %esp-24 arg4 %esp-28 free stack space base outgoing arguments return point arg1 arg2 arg3 arg4 low address high address … %esp %esp-4 %esp-8 %esp-12 %esp-16 free stack space (A) Before Tail Call (B) At Tail Call Figure 3. One way of implementing proper tail calls is by collaps- ing the tail frame. The ﬁgures show (A) the evaluation and place- ment of the arguments on the stack above the local variables, then (B) moving the arguments down to overwrite the current frame im- mediately before making the tail jump. (let ((x 5)) (lambda (y) (lambda () (+ x y)))) is transformed to: (let ((x 5)) (lambda (y) (x) (lambda () (x y) (+ x y)))) 2. The lambda forms are transformed into closure forms and the codes are collected at the top. The previous example yields: (labels ((f0 (code () (x y) (+ x y))) (f1 (code (y) (x) (closure f0 x y)))) (let ((x 5)) (closure f1 x))) 3.10 Proper Tail Calls The Scheme report requires that implementations be properly tail- recursive. By treating tail-calls properly, we guarantee that an un- bounded number of tail calls can be performed in constant space. So far, our compiler would compile tail-calls as regular calls followed by a return. A proper tail-call, on the other hand, must perform a jmp to the target of the call, using the same stack position of the caller itself. A very simple way of implementing tail-calls is as follows (illustrated in Figure 3): 1. All the arguments are evaluated and saved on the stack in the same way arguments to nontail calls are evaluated. 2. The operator is evaluated and placed in the %edi register re- placing the current closure pointer. 3. The arguments are copied from their current position of the stack to the positions adjacent to the return-point at the base of the stack. 4. An indirect jmp, not call, through the address in the closure pointer is issued. This treatment of tail calls is the simplest way of achieving the objective of the requirement. Other methods for enhancing performance by minimizing the excessive copying are discussed later in Section 4. 32 Scheme and Functional Programming, 2006 3.11 Complex Constants Scheme’s constants are not limited to the immediate objects. Using the quote form, lists, vectors, and strings can be turned into con- stants as well. The formal semantics of Scheme require that quoted constants always evaluate to the same object. The following exam- ple must always evaluate to true: (let ((f (lambda () (quote (1 . "H"))))) (eq? (f) (f))) So, in general, we cannot transform a quoted constant into an unquoted series of constructions as the following incorrect trans- formation demonstrates: (let ((f (lambda () (cons 1 (string #\H))))) (eq? (f) (f))) One way of implementing complex constants is by lifting their construction to the top of the program. The example program can be transformed to an equivalent program containing no complex constants as follows: (let ((tmp0 (cons 1 (string #\H)))) (let ((f (lambda () tmp0))) (eq? (f) (f)))) Performing this transformation before closure conversion makes the introduced temporaries occur as free variables in the enclosing lambdas. This increases the size of many closures, increasing heap consumption and slowing down the compiled programs. Another approach for implementing complex constants is by introducing global memory locations to hold the values of these constants. Every complex constant is assigned a label, denoting its location. All the complex constants are initialized at the start of the program. Our running example would be transformed to: (labels ((f0 (code () () (constant-ref t1))) (t1 (datum))) (constant-init t1 (cons 1 (string #\H))) (let ((f (closure f0))) (eq? (f) (f)))) The code generator should now be modiﬁed to handle the data labels as well as the two internal forms constant-ref and constant-init. 3.12 Assignment Let’s examine how our compiler treats variables. At the source level, variables are introduced either by let or by lambda. By the time we get to code generation, a third kind (free-variables) is there as well. When a lambda closes over a reference to a variable, we copied the value of the variable into a ﬁeld in the closure. If more than one closure references the variable, each gets its own copy of the value. If the variable is assignable, then all references and assignments occurring in the code must reference/assign to the same location that holds the value of the the variable. Therefore, every assignable variable must be given one unique location to hold its value. The way we treat assignment is by making the locations of assignable variables explicit. These locations cannot in general be stack-allocated due to the indeﬁnite extent of Scheme’s closures. So, for every assignable variable, we allocate space on the heap (a vector of size 1) to hold its value. An assignment to a variable x is rewritten as an assignment to the memory location holding x (via vector-set!) and references to x are rewritten as references to the location of x (via vector-ref). The following example illustrates assignment conversion when applied to a program containing one assignable variable c: (let ((f (lambda (c) (cons (lambda (v) (set! c v)) (lambda () c))))) (let ((p (f 0))) ((car p) 12) ((cdr p)))) => (let ((f (lambda (t0) (let ((c (vector t0))) (cons (lambda (v) (vector-set! c 0 v)) (lambda () (vector-ref c 0))))))) (let ((p (f 0))) ((car p) 12) ((cdr p)))) 3.13 Extending the Syntax With most of the core forms (lambda, let, quote, if, set!, constants, variables, procedure calls, and primitive calls) in place, we can turn to extending the syntax of the language. The input to our compiler is preprocessed by a pass, a macro-expander, which performs the following tasks: • All the variables are renamed to new unique names through α- conversion. This serves two purposes. First, making all vari- ables unique eliminates the ambiguity between variables. This makes the analysis passes required for closure and assignment conversion simpler. Second, there is no fear of confusing the core forms with procedure calls to local variables with the same name (e.g. an occurrence of (lambda (x) x) where lambda is a lexical variable). • Additionally, this pass places explicit tags on all internal forms including function calls (funcall) and primitive calls (primcall). • Extended forms are simpliﬁed to the code forms. The forms let*, letrec, letrec*, cond, case, or, and, when, unless, and internal define are rewritten in terms of the core forms. 3.14 Symbols, Libraries, and Separate Compilation All of the primitives that we supported so far were simple enough to be implemented directly in the compiler as a sequence of assembly instructions. This is ﬁne for the simple primitives, such as pair? and vector-ref, but it will not be practical for implementing more complex primitives such as length, map, display, etc.. Also, we restricted our language to allow primitives to occur only in the operator position: passing the value of the primitive car was not allowed because car has no value. One way of ﬁxing this is by performing an inverse-η transformation: car ⇒(lambda (x) (car x)). This approach has many disadvantages. First, the resulting assem- bly code is bloated with too many closures that were not present in the source program. Second, the primitives cannot be deﬁned recursively or deﬁned by using common helpers. Another approach for making an extended library available is by wrapping the user code with a large letrec that deﬁnes all the primitive libraries. This approach is discouraged because the intermixing of user-code and library-code hinders our ability to debug our compiler. A better approach is to deﬁne the libraries in separate ﬁles, com- piling them independently, and linking them directly with the user code. The library primitives are initialized before control enters the user program. Every primitive is given a global location, or a la- bel, to hold its value. We modify our compiler to handle two addi- tional forms: (primitive-ref x) and (primitive-set! x v) which are analogous to constant-ref and constant-init that Scheme and Functional Programming, 2006 33 we introduced in 3.11. The only difference is that global labels are used to hold the values of the primitives. The ﬁrst library ﬁle initializes one primitive: string->symbol. Our ﬁrst implementation of string->symbol need not be ef- ﬁcient: a simple linked list of symbols sufﬁces. The primitive string->symbol, as its name suggests, takes a string as input and returns a symbol. By adding the core primitives make-symbol1 and symbol-string, the implementation of string->symbol simply traverses the list of symbols looking for one having the same string. A new symbol is constructed if one with the same name does not exist. This new symbol is then added to the list before it is returned. Once string->symbol is implemented, adding symbols to our set of valid complex constants is straightforward by the following transformation: (labels ((f0 (code () () ’foo))) (let ((f (closure f0))) (eq? (funcall f) (funcall f)))) => (labels ((f0 (code () () (constant-ref t1))) (t1 (datum))) (constant-init t1 (funcall (primitive-ref string->symbol) (string #\f #\o #\o))) (let ((f (closure f0))) (eq? (funcall f) (funcall f)))) 3.15 Foreign Functions Our Scheme implementation cannot exist in isolation. It needs a way of interacting with the host operating system in order to perform Input/Output and many other useful operations. We now add a very simple way of calling to foreign C procedures. We add one additional form to our compiler: <Expr> ::= (foreign-call <string> <Expr> ...) The foreign-call form takes a string literal as the ﬁrst argu- ment. The string denotes the name of the C procedure that we intend to call. Each of the expressions are evaluated ﬁrst and their values are passed as arguments to the C procedure. The calling convention for C differs from the calling convention that we have been using for Scheme in that the arguments are placed below the return point and in reverse order. Figure 4 illustrates the difference. To accommodate the C calling conventions, we evaluate the arguments to a foreign-call in reverse order, saving the values on the stack, adjusting the value of %esp, issuing a call to the named procedure, then adjusting the stack pointer back to its initial position. We need not worry about the C procedure clobbering the values of the allocation and closure pointer because the Application Binary Interface (ABI) guarantees that the callee would preserve the values of the %edi, %esi, %ebp and %esp registers[14]. Since the values we pass to the foreign procedure are tagged, we would write wrapper procedures in our run-time ﬁle that take care of converting from Scheme to C values and back. We ﬁrst implement and test calling the exit procedure. Call- ing (foreign-call "exit" 0) should cause our program to exit without performing any output. We also implement a wrapper around write as follows: ptr s_write(ptr fd, ptr str, ptr len){ int bytes = write(unshift(fd), string_data(str), unshift(len)); return shift(bytes); } 1 Symbols are similar to pairs in having two ﬁelds: a string and a value base incoming arguments return point arg1 arg2 low address high address … %esp %esp-4 %esp-8 arg3 %esp-12 free stack space base incoming arguments arg3 arg2 arg1 low address high address … %esp+12 %esp+8 %esp+4 return point %esp free stack space (A) Parameter passing to Scheme (B) Parameter passing to C Figure 4. The parameters to Scheme functions are placed on the stack above the return point while the parameters to C functions are placed below the return point. 3.16 Error Checking and Safe Primitives Using our newly acquired ability to write and exit, we can deﬁne a simple error procedure that takes two arguments: a symbol (denoting the caller of error), and a string (describing the error). The error procedure would write an error message to the console, then causes the program to exit. With error, we can secure some parts of our implementation to provide better debugging facilities. Better debugging allows us to progress with implementing the rest of the system more quickly since we won’t have to hunt for the causes of segfaults. There are three main causes of fatal errors: 1. Attempting to call non-procedures. 2. Passing an incorrect number of arguments to a procedure. 3. Calling primitives with invalid arguments. For example: per- forming (car 5) causes an immediate segfault. Worse, per- forming vector-set! with an index that’s out of range causes other parts of the system to get corrupted, resulting in hard-to- debug errors. Calling nonprocedures can be handled by performing a proce- dure check before making the procedure call. If the operator is not a procedure, control is transferred to an error handler label that sets up a call to a procedure that reports the error and exits. Passing an incorrect number of arguments to a procedure can be handled by a collaboration from the caller and the callee. The caller, once it performs the procedure check, sets the value of the %eax register to be the number of arguments passed. The callee checks that the value of %eax is consistent with the number of arguments it expects. Invalid arguments cause a jump to a label that calls a procedure that reports the error and exits. For primitive calls, we can modify the compiler to insert explicit checks at every primitive call. For example, car translates to: movl %eax, %ebx andl $7, %ebx cmpl $1, %ebx jne L_car_error movl -1(%eax), %eax ... L_car_error: movl car_err_proc, %edi # load handler movl $0, %eax # set arg-count jmp *-3(%edi) # call the handler ... 34 Scheme and Functional Programming, 2006 Another approach is to restrict the compiler to unsafe primitives. Calls to safe primitives are not open-coded by the compiler, instead, a procedure call to the safe primitive is issued. The safe primitives are deﬁned to perform the error checks themselves. Although this strategy is less efﬁcient than open-coding the safe primitives, the implementation is much simpler and less error-prone. 3.17 Variable-arity Procedures Scheme procedures that accept a variable number of arguments are easy to implement in the architecture we deﬁned so far. Suppose a procedure is deﬁned to accept two or more arguments as in the following example: (let ((f (lambda (a b . c) (vector a b c)))) (f 1 2 3 4)) The call to f passes four arguments in the stack locations %esp-4, %esp-8, %esp-12, and %esp-16 in addition to the num- ber of arguments in %eax. Upon entry of f, and after performing the argument check, f enters a loop that constructs a list of the arguments last to front. Implementing variable-arity procedures allows us to deﬁne many library procedures that accept any number of arguments including +, -, *, =, <, ..., char=?, char<?, ... , string=?, string<?, . . . , list, vector, string, and append. Other variations of lambda such as case-lambda, which al- lows us to dispatch different parts of the code depending on the number of actual arguments, can be implemented easily and efﬁ- ciently by a series of comparisons and conditional jumps. 3.18 Apply The implementation of the apply primitive is analogous to the implementation of variable-arity procedures. Procedures accepting variable number of arguments convert the extra arguments passed on the stack to a list. Calling apply, on the other hand, splices a list of arguments onto the stack. When the code generator encounters an apply call, it generates the code in the same manner as if it were a regular procedure call. The operands are evaluated and saved in their appropriate stack locations as usual. The operator is evaluated and checked. In case of nontail calls, the current closure pointer is saved and the stack pointer is adjusted. In case of tail calls, the operands are moved to overwrite the current frame. The number of arguments is placed in %eax as usual. The only difference is that instead of calling the procedure directly, we call/jmp to the L apply label which splices the last argument on the stack before transferring control to the destination procedure. Implementing apply makes it possible to deﬁne the library procedures that take a function as well as an arbitrary number of arguments such as map and for-each. 3.19 Output Ports The functionality provided by our compiler so far allows us to implement output ports easily in Scheme. We represent output ports by vector containing the following ﬁelds: 0. A unique identiﬁer that allows us to distinguish output ports from ordinary vectors. 1. A string denoting the ﬁle name associated with the port. 2. A ﬁle-descriptor associated with the opened ﬁle. 3. A string that serves as an output buffer. 4. An index pointing to the next position in the buffer. 5. The size of the buffer. The current-output-port is initialized at startup and its ﬁle descriptor is 1 on Unix systems. The buffers are chosen to be sufﬁciently large (4096 characters) in order to reduce the num- ber of trips to the operating system. The procedure write-char writes to the buffer, increments the index, and if the index of the port reaches its size, the contents of the buffer are ﬂushed us- ing s write (from 3.15) and the index is reset. The procedures output-port?, open-output-file, close-output-port, and flush-output-port are also implemented. 3.20 Write and Display Once write-char is implemented, implementing the procedures write and display becomes straightforward by dispatching on the type of the argument. The two procedures are identical except for their treatment of strings and characters and therefore can be implemented in terms of one common procedure. In order to write the ﬁxnums, the primitive quotient must be added to the com- piler. Implementing write in Scheme allows us to eliminate the now- redundant writer that we implemented as part of the C run-time system. 3.21 Input Ports The representation of input ports is very similar to output ports. The only difference is that we add one extra ﬁeld to support “un- reading” a character which adds very minor overhead to the prim- itives read-char and peek-char, but greatly simpliﬁes the im- plementation of the tokenizer (next step). The primitives added at this stage are input-port?, open-input-file, read-char, unread-char, peek-char, and eof-obje
