---
id: 170
url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=45783376
title: 'Ask HN: Where to begin with &quot;modern&quot; Emacs? | Hacker News'
domain: news.ycombinator.com
source_date: '2025-11-01'
tags:
- tutorial
- cli-tool
- social-media
summary: This Hacker News discussion addresses how newcomers to Emacs can get started
  with modern tools and configurations, with a Neovim user seeking guidance on best
  practices and plugin ecosystems. The community recommends several resources including
  **Bedrock** (a minimal starter kit with curated modern packages like Vertico and
  Consult), **SystemCrafters** (a comprehensive learning resource), and aggregated
  resources like Emacs News and the Emacs subreddit, while emphasizing that unlike
  Neovim, Emacs lacks a single authoritative figure but has an active community sharing
  evolving best practices.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Ask HN: Where to begin with &quot;modern&quot; Emacs? | Hacker News

Hacker News new | past | comments | ask | show | jobs | submit login Ask HN: Where to begin with "modern" Emacs? 228 points by weakfish 72 days ago | hide | past | favorite | 121 comments Hi all, I’m a longtime Neovim user who’s been EMacs-curious. The hold up for me has been that I’ve been unable to find a source of truth for what’s top-of-the-line as far as plugins are. With Neovim, it’s a safe bet to look at what folks like Folke are doing, but I have struggled to find a similar figure in the Emacs community who gives insight into what’s-what. I know Doom exists, but I want to fully “own” my config and not over complicate it. Thanks! xenodium 72 days ago | next [–] Welcome to Emacs! - I write about Emacs things fairly frequently: https://xenodium.com - I started making Emacs videos recently: https://www.youtube.com/xenodium - For aggregated Emacs blogs, check out https://planet.emacslife.com - For aggregated Emacs videos, https://emacs.tv - The Emacs subreddit can be handy too https://www.reddit.com/r/emacs - If on the fediverse, follow the #emacs hashtag - Sacha Chua's Emacs News are great https://sachachua.com/blog/category/emacs-news With respect to "modern", maybe these two posts could be of interest: - Visual tweaks: https://xenodium.com/my-emacs-eye-candy - macOS tricks: https://xenodium.com/awesome-emacs-on-macos Enjoy the ride! chipotle_coyote 71 days ago | parent | next [–] Sort of side question, but why do you set the command key to be Emacs' meta key? I've sort of waffled on that myself -- the plus to doing it is that it matches Windows (which I am in too much of the time) and Linux, but the minus is that it not only breaks 20+ years of muscle memory I have with MacOS, it collides with a few other global hotkeys. (Recent collisions I've noticed are Alfred's clipboard manager, which defaults to Shift-Command-\ (M-|, shell-command-on-region), and the system-level screenshot hotkey on Shift-Command-5 (M-%, query-replace). hibbelig 71 days ago | root | parent | next [–] For the keys you don’t need to type quickly, M-x can also be typed as ESC x. For any character x. So it works well with M-|, but not so well with M-f, for example. xenodium 71 days ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] Ah yes. I find the ⌘ key placement a little more ergonomic/convenient, but at the end of the day, pick whatever works for ya. Thinking back, I prolly didn't use those two commands often enough to internalize M-| or M-% bindings, so the system-level handling didn't bother me. While I do replace things all the time, I typically use multiple cursors (I do use bindings for that). If I need querying, I just type `M-x que RET` which gets picked up by a completion frameworks (in my case ivy). Relatedly, I also use Hammerspoon on macOS and set some global key bindings using the ⌥ key. dolearning 69 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] As a Mac vim and Obsidian user, I've normally explored Doom when I've dipped my toe in the Emacs waters. Would you recommend starting from a less customised install and build up from there? xenodium 67 days ago | root | parent | next [–] I’d say if you feel comfortable with Doom, keep at it. Coming from vim, it may be a smoother transition. You can always reconsider at any time. Doom is Emacs just as vanilla is. kevstev 72 days ago | prev | next [–] I saw what was possible with emacs via systemcrafters: https://systemcrafters.net/emacs-from-scratch/ And I should note I have been using it for about 25 years, and was mostly in the dark about what it was capable of, though many of those years were in environments where I was using versions 5-10 years out of date, and completely locked down/out of things like melpa. As far as keeping up with whats latest and greatest, I think the real answer is there isn't a good online resource. There are emacs meetups and conferences and some are virtual, and you can ask around other power users and see what they are doing. I even find emacs packages to be pretty poor at selling themselves on why you should use them. As an example, Ivy and Counsel are kind of game changers to the UI, but I don't think you get any idea of that from their manual or main github page: https://github.com/abo-abo/swiper omnicognate 72 days ago | parent | next [–] Vertico and Consult are the successors to Ivy and Counsel. They're more cleanly integrated with the native capabilities. I've found them a big improvement. Systemcrafters have a video on moving to them, but I haven't watched it. senkora 72 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] +1 to systemcrafters. It is probably the closest community to what you are looking for. ews 72 days ago | root | parent | next [–] +2 , it's an amazing resource for emacs and guix MkLouis 72 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] +1 from me aswell. I personally started with SystemsCrafters and after I started to grok Emacs I went to use DoomEmacs. I found DistroTubes literate DoomEmacs Config a good starting point to see whats possible. https://gitlab.com/dwt1/dotfiles/-/blob/master/.config/doom/... ashton314 72 days ago | prev | next [–] I maintain a pretty popular Emacs starter-kit called Bedrock. [1] I suggest starting with it, or at least taking a look at it to get some ideas! Bedrock differs philosophically from Doom et al. in that Bedrock is meant to be as simple as possible . There's no magic, no extra package management system (looking at you Doom) to break or confuse. By default, it doesn't install any 3rd-party packages—it just sets better defaults. Recent versions of Emacs can do a lot, but the defaults are painfully outdated. Bedrock fixes that. It's basically a vanilla Emacs experience without some of the cruft carried over from the previous century. Bedrock also comes with a curated set of packages to enhance Emacs beyond better defaults. You can load these into your config as you begin to need them. List here: [2] If you are looking for a set of "modern" packages, this is it. I do pretty well keeping up in this space, and a lot of these (esp. Vertico, Consult, Corfu, etc.) seem to be accepted as the de-facto best replacements for older packages like Helm, Ivy, etc. (That said, I should add some config for Casual—very neat package to help with seldom-used features of Emacs.) Bedrock is meant to be understandable: clone it once, and then tweak from there. You'll find a lot of forks of Bedrock on GitHub as people have forked it and then built their own config on top. I'm working on updating Bedrock for Emacs 31. There won't really be that many changes, so like, don't wait for 31 to start your Emacs journey, but know that Bedrock is actively maintained and that the packages I've curated for it are the best I could possibly find. :) Oh, also, if you search "best Emacs packages", my blog post [3] will come up on the first page on basically every search engine I've tried. ;) Happy hacking! [1]: https://codeberg.org/ashton314/emacs-bedrock [2]: https://codeberg.org/ashton314/emacs-bedrock#extras [3]: https://lambdaland.org/posts/2024-05-30_top_emacs_packages/ aquariusDue 71 days ago | parent | next [–] Thank you for making and maintaining Bedrock! In the past I've used Emfy as a starting point but some time ago I declared Emacs bankruptcy and started from Bedrock, every chance I get I recommend it now. ashton314 70 days ago | root | parent | next [–] Thank you for the kind words. :) I'm so glad it was useful to you. kingkongjaffa 70 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] I used spacemacs in the past primarily to drive org-mode. Fell out of love with it after a few years and moved to pen and paper bullet journal. Interested in trying emacs again with something simpler, will give bedrock a try! stebian_dable 71 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] Bedrock is a great starting point. Plays well with https://github.com/bbatsov/crux also. presto8 71 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] +1 for emacs-bedrock! It helped me get started with reasonable defaults out-of-box. From there, I started adjusting it to my own needs. ashton314 70 days ago | root | parent | next [–] > started adjusting it to my own needs Yay! That's 100% what it was made for. Any suggestions on how to make key features more discoverable welcome. scott01 72 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] I’ve recently rewrote my configuration and used Bedrock as a new starting point. It’s great, thanks very much for making it! ashton314 70 days ago | root | parent | next [–] You're welcome! I'm glad it was useful for you. :) weakfish 72 days ago | parent | prev | next [–] Great, thank you! I will definitely reference this. ashton314 70 days ago | root | parent | next [–] lmk if you get stuck—feel free to open issues on Codeberg. (There's a GitHub mirror too where you can open issues if you don't have a Codeberg account.) defanor 72 days ago | prev | next [–] I think the usual advice is to try the vanilla Emacs, maybe use better-defaults (either directly or just for inspiration), as it is a relatively light customization. The setups people use tend to be quite different, as do their opinions on packages, so I doubt there is a single satisfactory and agreed upon "source of truth". Others' setups may be useful to check out, possibly pages of emacswiki.org, chatter on the #emacs IRC channel at libera.chat. Edit: As for heavily customized versions (Doom, spacemacs), I have not tried those myself, but occasionally saw people having issues with those, and others not being able to help them, since it was not clear what sort of magic is going on there. So I would not recommend those to new users, at least not if you would like to learn the basics and get a better hang of it, to be able to debug it, though some seem to be happy with those. tammer 72 days ago | parent | next [–] I will second the recommendation to start with vanilla emacs. That isn't to disparage releases like spacemacs & doom. I simply found those to be more useful once I fully understood the power that comes with a fully reprogrammable editor. There is
