---
id: 333
url: https://kristoff.it/blog/asynchrony-is-not-concurrency/
title: Asynchrony is not Concurrency | Loris Cro's Blog
domain: kristoff.it
source_date: '2025-07-19'
tags:
- tutorial
- web-dev
summary: 'This article argues that **asynchrony and concurrency are distinct concepts**
  that are often conflated in programming. Asynchrony refers to tasks running out
  of order while remaining correct (like saving two independent files), while concurrency
  requires actual simultaneous progress (like a server accepting connections while
  a client connects). The author proposes that this distinction matters because conflating
  them has led to inefficient language ecosystems where async code becomes "viral,"
  forcing library users into async-only workflows.


  **Key takeaway for your GenAI codebase:** Rather than making asynchronous patterns
  mandatory throughout your codebase, you could design libraries and utilities that
  support *asynchrony without requiring concurrency*, allowing synchronous code to
  remain viable while still enabling concurrent execution when needed. This would
  reduce unnecessary complexity and avoid forcing all dependencies into an async model.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Asynchrony is not Concurrency | Loris Cro's Blog

Loris Cro Personal Website About • Twitter • Twitch • YouTube • GitHub Asynchrony is not Concurrency July 18, 2025 • 12 min read • by Loris Cro Yes I know about that one talk from Rob Pike. The title of this blog post is not something you hear people say often, if ever. What you do hear people say is “concurrency is not parallelism”, but that’s not as useful, in my opinion. Let’s see how Wikipedia defines those terms: Concurrency refers to the ability of a system to execute multiple tasks through simultaneous execution or time-sharing (context switching) Parallel computing is a type of computation in which many calculations or processes are carried out simultaneously. What if I told you we’re missing a term to describe another aspect of concurrent programming and, because of it, we’re all collectively missing a key piece of understanding that has shaped our software ecosystems for the worse? Well, I spoiled it in the title: the missing term is ‘asynchrony’, but why? Two files Say that you have to save two files and order does not matter: io . async ( saveFileA , . { io } ) ; io . async ( saveFileB , . { io } ) ; A could be saved before B, or B could be saved before A, and all would be fine. You could also write some of A, then some of B, and then back to A, to finally complete writing B. That also would be correct, and in fact that’s what tends to happen when using evented I/O to save sufficiently complex files concurrently. But, most importantly, it’s perfectly legitimate to do all the work to save one file first and, only once that’s done, to begin saving the second file . Maybe that would not be the most efficient thing to do, but the code would still be correct. Two sockets Let’s take a look now at another example: say that you need to create a TCP server and connect to it from within the same program . // assume that server.listen has already been called io . async ( Server . accept , . { server , io } ) ; io . async ( Client . connect , . { client , io } ) ; Like before, the order doesn’t matter: the client could begin a connection before the server starts accepting (the OS will buffer the client request in the meantime), or the server could start accepting first and wait for a bit before seeing an incoming connection. Unlike before, it is mandatory that the execution of both tasks overlap . In the file example it was fine to do all the work for A first and all the work for B last, but not in this second case, because the server needs to be active while the client tries to connect. Asynchrony, Concurrency, Parallelism In common lingo, we would describe both the code snippets presented above as “concurrent” and stop there, but that will lose us some nuance, so here’s my proposed definitions for these terms: Asynchrony : the possibility for tasks to run out of order and still be correct. Concurrency : the ability of a system to progress multiple tasks at a time, be it via parallelism or task switching. Parallelism : the ability of a system to execute more than one task simultaneously at the physical level. With these definitions in hand, here’s a better description of the two code snippets from before: both scripts express asynchrony, but the second one requires concurrency. Why even bother? Ok, cool, we now can be more precise when describing code snippets, so what did we gain? For dramatic effect, allow me to answer this question in the negative and tell you what it is that we lost by not being aware enough of the difference between asynchrony and concurrency. Because of our lack of understanding: We have created language ecosystems where library authors must duplicate effort (e.g. redis-py vs asyncio-redis ) or worse . We have created a worse experience for library users where async code is viral and where a even a single dependency with async code demands that users give up their ability to write normal, synchronous code. And to mitigate all these problems, we have created unholy escape hatches that cause suboptimal behavior at best and deadlocks at worst. Let’s switch back to answering the question in the positive. In Zig Asynchrony is not Concurrency I already wrote a blog post on Zig’s new async I/O story, but I only dedicated a short section at the end on this aspect, which led me to expand on it in this post. In Zig asynchrony is not concurrency because the usage of io.async does not imply concurrency. In other words: code that uses io.async can be run in single-threaded blocking mode. Let’s look again at the file example: io . async ( saveFileA , . { io } ) ; io . async ( saveFileB , . { io } ) ; When run in single-threaded blocking mode, the code above will be equivalent to this: saveFileA ( io ) ; saveFileB ( io ) ; It’s easy to imagine how this can be done, all io.async has to do is run the given function immediately (instead of spawning a new thread for it, or doing any other form of task switching). This means that a library author can use io.async in their code and not force their users to move away from single-threaded blocking I/O. Conversely, code that does not use io.async can still take advantage of concurrency. But wouldn’t doing that cause deadlocks? The answer is that this is an ill-posed question. What makes synchronous code behave well in the presence of concurrency are two things (aside from plain multithreading): Usage of evented I/O syscalls (io_uring, epoll, kequeue, etc.) instead of blocking ones. Usage of task switching primitives to continue doing work while I/O operations are being carried out by the OS. Neither of these things is something you see at the surface level (so looking at synchronous code tells you usually very little) and especially wrt the second point, async is not the task switching primitive, because it only concerns itself with asynchrony, not concurrency (and task switching is – by the definition I gave above – a concept specific to concurrency). The task switching primitive is usually called yield , let’s take a look at how that works in the case of green threads: Take the synchronous code example again, wrap it in a function for extra clarity and let’s also pass down the names of the two files to write. This last change will become useful in a moment. fn saveData ( io : Io , nameA : [ ] const u8 , nameB : [ ] const u8 ) ! void { try saveFileA ( io , nameA ) ; try saveFileB ( io , nameB ) ; } When we execute saveData we call saveFileA which in turn will, at some point, call a function to write bytes to a file. In Zig’s design this is done by using an io parameter, but there are plenty of different ways to make this work. What matters is that at some point we get to an implementation of write specific to the green threads execution model. The write function will request to perform a write to the file and then, instead of blocking while the operation is carried out, the syscall will return immediately (in the case of io_uring it’s not even a syscall, it’s just a memory write to a ring buffer). At this point the write operation has been submitted and our program needs to switch to a different task while this one waits for the operation to complete. In other words, we need to yield. In the case of green threads, yielding is performed by stack swapping. We save at a location in memory the state of all general purpose registers in the CPU (including program counter and stack pointer), and we load another “snapshot” from memory to the CPU (again, including program counter and stack pointer which now point to machine code in a different part of the executable, and to a different stack in memory). The snapshot that we’re loading was previously saved using this same technique by the event loop which yielded to resume a task that was reported as ready to resume by a notification from the OS. Now that we’re switching back to the event loop, the same will happen again. While I described stack swapping with some level of detail, it should be noted that this is more or less the same way in which your OS schedules threads on CPU cores. If you want to see a fully concrete example of stack swapping in action, I’ve implemented it live on Twitch in a barebones riscv32 kernel . I won’t get into the weeds of a stackless coroutines implementation, but the core principle is the exact same: designing a yielding primitive that lets you switch tasks. Here you can see the latest proposal for Zig, where historically the stackless task switching primitive has been implemented by suspend and resume . Now that task switching is clear, let’s go back to the event loop. If saveData is written in a synchronous manner, what can the event loop do while it waits for evented I/O to complete? The answer is that it depends on the rest of the program. Concurrency needs to exploit asynchrony and, if there’s none, then no tasks can be in execution at the same time, like in this case for example: pub fn main ( ) ! void { const io = newGreenThreadsIo ( ) ; try saveData ( io , "a.txt" , "b.txt" ) ; } But the fact that saveData doesn’t express asynchrony does not prevent other parts of the program from expressing it: pub fn main ( ) ! void { const io = newGreenThreadsIo ( ) ; io . async ( saveData , . { io , "a" , "b" } ) ; io . async ( saveData , . { io , "c" , "d" ) ; } In this case the two different calls to saveData can be scheduled concurrently because they are asynchronous to one another, and the fact that they don’t express any internal asynchrony does not compromise the execution model. This allows normal synchronous code and asynchronous code to run concurrently in the same program without any issue. No need for code duplication of libraries, and no need for users to accept Faustian bargains in order to use an “async library” (note how that terminology is meaningless in light of our new understanding, that is just “a library” now!). If this result feels surprising to you, it’s probably because you’re used to async being tied to stackless coroutines, which normally causes the usage of async a
