---
id: 231
url: https://sites.stat.columbia.edu/gelman/book/BDA3.pdf
title: Bayesian Data Analysis book
domain: sites.stat.columbia.edu
source_date: '2025-09-28'
tags:
- academic-paper
summary: 'This is the third edition of "Bayesian Data Analysis," a comprehensive textbook
  by Andrew Gelman and colleagues that covers both foundational and advanced topics
  in Bayesian statistics. The book is organized into four main parts: fundamentals
  of Bayesian inference (probability, single and multiparameter models), practical
  Bayesian data analysis (model checking and evaluation), advanced computational methods
  (Markov chain simulation and approximations), and regression models (hierarchical,
  generalized linear, and robust models). It serves as a complete reference for understanding
  Bayesian methodology from theory to real-world application with computational implementation.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Bayesian Data Analysis book

This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. Bayesian Data Analysis Third edition (with errors ﬁxed as of 20 February 2025) Andrew Gelman Columbia University John B. Carlin University of Melbourne Hal S. Stern University of California, Irvine David B. Dunson Duke University Aki Vehtari Aalto University Donald B. Rubin Harvard University Copyright ©1995–2021, by Andrew Gelman, John Carlin, Hal Stern, Donald Rubin, David Dunson, and Aki Vehtari This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. Contents Preface xiii Part I: Fundamentals of Bayesian Inference 1 1 Probability and inference 3 1.1 The three steps of Bayesian data analysis 3 1.2 General notation for statistical inference 4 1.3 Bayesian inference 6 1.4 Discrete examples: genetics and spell checking 8 1.5 Probability as a measure of uncertainty 11 1.6 Example: probabilities from football point spreads 13 1.7 Example: calibration for record linkage 16 1.8 Some useful results from probability theory 19 1.9 Computation and software 22 1.10 Bayesian inference in applied statistics 24 1.11 Bibliographic note 25 1.12 Exercises 27 2 Single-parameter models 29 2.1 Estimating a probability from binomial data 29 2.2 Posterior as compromise between data and prior information 32 2.3 Summarizing posterior inference 32 2.4 Informative prior distributions 34 2.5 Normal distribution with known variance 39 2.6 Other standard single-parameter models 42 2.7 Example: informative prior distribution for cancer rates 46 2.8 Noninformative prior distributions 51 2.9 Weakly informative prior distributions 55 2.10 Bibliographic note 56 2.11 Exercises 57 3 Introduction to multiparameter models 63 3.1 Averaging over ‘nuisance parameters’ 63 3.2 Normal data with a noninformative prior distribution 64 3.3 Normal data with a conjugate prior distribution 67 3.4 Multinomial model for categorical data 69 3.5 Multivariate normal model with known variance 70 3.6 Multivariate normal with unknown mean and variance 72 3.7 Example: analysis of a bioassay experiment 74 3.8 Summary of elementary modeling and computation 78 3.9 Bibliographic note 78 3.10 Exercises 79 vii This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. viii CONTENTS 4 Asymptotics and connections to non-Bayesian approaches 83 4.1 Normal approximations to the posterior distribution 83 4.2 Large-sample theory 87 4.3 Counterexamples to the theorems 89 4.4 Frequency evaluations of Bayesian inferences 91 4.5 Bayesian interpretations of other statistical methods 92 4.6 Bibliographic note 97 4.7 Exercises 98 5 Hierarchical models 101 5.1 Constructing a parameterized prior distribution 102 5.2 Exchangeability and hierarchical models 104 5.3 Bayesian analysis of conjugate hierarchical models 108 5.4 Normal model with exchangeable parameters 113 5.5 Example: parallel experiments in eight schools 119 5.6 Hierarchical modeling applied to a meta-analysis 124 5.7 Weakly informative priors for variance parameters 128 5.8 Bibliographic note 132 5.9 Exercises 134 Part II: Fundamentals of Bayesian Data Analysis 139 6 Model checking 141 6.1 The place of model checking in applied Bayesian statistics 141 6.2 Do the inferences from the model make sense? 142 6.3 Posterior predictive checking 143 6.4 Graphical posterior predictive checks 153 6.5 Model checking for the educational testing example 159 6.6 Bibliographic note 161 6.7 Exercises 163 7 Evaluating, comparing, and expanding models 165 7.1 Measures of predictive accuracy 166 7.2 Information criteria and cross-validation 169 7.3 Model comparison based on predictive performance 178 7.4 Model comparison using Bayes factors 182 7.5 Continuous model expansion 184 7.6 Implicit assumptions and model expansion: an example 187 7.7 Bibliographic note 192 7.8 Exercises 194 8 Modeling accounting for data collection 197 8.1 Bayesian inference requires a model for data collection 197 8.2 Data-collection models and ignorability 199 8.3 Sample surveys 205 8.4 Designed experiments 214 8.5 Sensitivity and the role of randomization 218 8.6 Observational studies 220 8.7 Censoring and truncation 224 8.8 Discussion 229 8.9 Bibliographic note 229 8.10 Exercises 230 This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. CONTENTS ix 9 Decision analysis 237 9.1 Bayesian decision theory in diﬀerent contexts 237 9.2 Using regression predictions: survey incentives 239 9.3 Multistage decision making: medical screening 245 9.4 Hierarchical decision analysis for home radon 246 9.5 Personal vs. institutional decision analysis 256 9.6 Bibliographic note 257 9.7 Exercises 257 Part III: Advanced Computation 259 10 Introduction to Bayesian computation 261 10.1 Numerical integration 261 10.2 Distributional approximations 262 10.3 Direct simulation and rejection sampling 263 10.4 Importance sampling 265 10.5 How many simulation draws are needed? 267 10.6 Computing environments 268 10.7 Debugging Bayesian computing 270 10.8 Bibliographic note 271 10.9 Exercises 272 11 Basics of Markov chain simulation 275 11.1 Gibbs sampler 276 11.2 Metropolis and Metropolis-Hastings algorithms 278 11.3 Using Gibbs and Metropolis as building blocks 280 11.4 Inference and assessing convergence 281 11.5 Eﬀective number of simulation draws 286 11.6 Example: hierarchical normal model 288 11.7 Bibliographic note 291 11.8 Exercises 291 12 Computationally eﬃcient Markov chain simulation 293 12.1 Eﬃcient Gibbs samplers 293 12.2 Eﬃcient Metropolis jumping rules 295 12.3 Further extensions to Gibbs and Metropolis 297 12.4 Hamiltonian Monte Carlo 300 12.5 Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for a hierarchical model 305 12.6 Stan: developing a computing environment 307 12.7 Bibliographic note 308 12.8 Exercises 309 13 Modal and distributional approximations 311 13.1 Finding posterior modes 311 13.2 Boundary-avoiding priors for modal summaries 313 13.3 Normal and related mixture approximations 318 13.4 Finding marginal posterior modes using EM 320 13.5 Conditional and marginal posterior approximations 325 13.6 Example: hierarchical normal model (continued) 326 13.7 Variational inference 331 13.8 Expectation propagation 338 13.9 Other approximations 343 This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. x CONTENTS 13.10 Unknown normalizing factors 345 13.11 Bibliographic note 348 13.12 Exercises 349 Part IV: Regression Models 351 14 Introduction to regression models 353 14.1 Conditional modeling 353 14.2 Bayesian analysis of classical regression 354 14.3 Regression for causal inference: incumbency and voting 358 14.4 Goals of regression analysis 364 14.5 Assembling the matrix of explanatory variables 365 14.6 Regularization and dimension reduction 367 14.7 Unequal variances and correlations 369 14.8 Including numerical prior information 376 14.9 Bibliographic note 378 14.10 Exercises 378 15 Hierarchical linear models 381 15.1 Regression coeﬃcients exchangeable in batches 382 15.2 Example: forecasting U.S. presidential elections 383 15.3 Interpreting a normal prior distribution as extra data 388 15.4 Varying intercepts and slopes 390 15.5 Computation: batching and transformation 392 15.6 Analysis of variance and the batching of coeﬃcients 395 15.7 Hierarchical models for batches of variance components 398 15.8 Bibliographic note 400 15.9 Exercises 402 16 Generalized linear models 405 16.1 Standard generalized linear model likelihoods 406 16.2 Working with generalized linear models 407 16.3 Weakly informative priors for logistic regression 412 16.4 Overdispersed Poisson regression for police stops 420 16.5 State-level opinons from national polls 422 16.6 Models for multivariate and multinomial responses 423 16.7 Loglinear models for multivariate discrete data 428 16.8 Bibliographic note 431 16.9 Exercises 432 17 Models for robust inference 435 17.1 Aspects of robustness 435 17.2 Overdispersed versions of standard models 437 17.3 Posterior inference and computation 439 17.4 Robust inference for the eight schools 441 17.5 Robust regression using t-distributed errors 444 17.6 Bibliographic note 445 17.7 Exercises 446 This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. CONTENTS xi 18 Models for missing data 449 18.1 Notation 449 18.2 Multiple imputation 451 18.3 Missing data in the multivariate normal and t models 454 18.4 Example: multiple imputation for a series of polls 456 18.5 Missing values with counted data 462 18.6 Example: an opinion poll in Slovenia 463 18.7 Bibliographic note 466 18.8 Exercises 467 Part V: Nonlinear and Nonparametric Models 469 19 Parametric nonlinear models 471 19.1 Example: serial dilution assay 471 19.2 Example: population toxicokinetics 477 19.3 Bibliographic note 485 19.4 Exercises 486 20 Basis function models 487 20.1 Splines and weighted sums of basis functions 487 20.2 Basis selection and shrinkage of coeﬃcients 490 20.3 Non-normal models and regression surfaces 494 20.4 Bibliographic note 498 20.5 Exercises 498 21 Gaussian process models 501 21.1 Gaussian process regression 501 21.2 Example: birthdays and birthdates 505 21.3 Latent Gaussian process models 510 21.4 Functional data analysis 512 21.5 Density estimation and regression 513 21.6 Bibliographic note 516 21.7 Exercises 516 22 Finite mixture models 519 22.1 Setting up and interpreting mixture models 519 22.2 Example: reaction times and schizophrenia 524 22.3 Label switching and posterior computation 533 22.4 Unspeciﬁed number of mixture components 536 22.5 Mixture models for classiﬁcation and regression 539 22.6 Bibliographic note 542 22.7 Exercises 543 23 Dirichlet process models 545 23.1 Bayesian histograms 545 23.2 Dirichlet process prior distributions 546 23.3 Dirichlet process mixtures 549 23.4 Beyond density estimation 557 23.5 Hierarchical dependence 560 23.6 Density regression 568 23.7 Bibliographic note 571 23.8 Exercises 573 This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. xii CONTENTS Appendixes 575 A Standard probability distributions 577 A.1 Continuous distributions 577 A.2 Discrete distributions 585 A.3 Bibliographic note 586 B Outline of proofs of limit theorems 587 B.1 Bibliographic note 590 C Computation in R and Stan 591 C.1 Getting started with R and Stan 591 C.2 Fitting a hierarchical model in Stan 592 C.3 Direct simulation, Gibbs, and Metropolis in R 596 C.4 Programming Hamiltonian Monte Carlo in R 603 C.5 Further comments on computation 607 C.6 Bibliographic note 608 References 609 Author Index 643 Subject Index 654 This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. Preface This book is intended to have three roles and to serve three associated audiences: an introductory text on Bayesian inference starting from ﬁrst principles, a graduate text on eﬀective current approaches to Bayesian modeling and computation in statistics and related ﬁelds, and a handbook of Bayesian methods in applied statistics for general users of and researchers in applied statistics. Although introductory in its early sections, the book is deﬁnitely not elementary in the sense of a ﬁrst text in statistics. The mathematics used in our book is basic probability and statistics, elementary calculus, and linear algebra. A review of probability notation is given in Chapter 1 along with a more detailed list of topics assumed to have been studied. The practical orientation of the book means that the reader’s previous experience in probability, statistics, and linear algebra should ideally have included strong computational components. To write an introductory text alone would leave many readers with only a taste of the conceptual elements but no guidance for venturing into genuine practical applications, be- yond those where Bayesian methods agree essentially with standard non-Bayesian analyses. On the other hand, we feel it would be a mistake to present the advanced methods with- out ﬁrst introducing the basic concepts from our data-analytic perspective. Furthermore, due to the nature of applied statistics, a text on current Bayesian methodology would be incomplete without a variety of worked examples drawn from real applications. To avoid cluttering the main narrative, there are bibliographic notes at the end of each chapter and references at the end of the book. Examples of real statistical analyses appear throughout the book, and we hope thereby to give an applied ﬂavor to the entire development. Indeed, given the conceptual simplicity of the Bayesian approach, it is only in the intricacy of speciﬁc applications that novelty arises. Non-Bayesian approaches dominated statistical theory and practice for most of the last century, but the last few decades have seen a re-emergence of Bayesian methods. This has been driven more by the availability of new computational techniques than by what many would see as the theoretical and logical advantages of Bayesian thinking. In our treatment of Bayesian inference, we focus on practice rather than philosophy. We demonstrate our attitudes via examples that have arisen in the applied research of ourselves and others. Chapter 1 presents our views on the foundations of probability as empirical and measurable; see in particular Sections 1.4–1.7. Changes for the third edition The biggest change for this new edition is the addition of Chapters 20–23 on nonparametric modeling. Other major changes include weakly informative priors in Chapters 2, 5, and elsewhere; boundary-avoiding priors in Chapter 13; an updated discussion of cross-validation and predictive information criteria in the new Chapter 7; improved convergence monitoring and eﬀective sample size calculations for iterative simulation in Chapter 11; presentations of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo, variational Bayes, and expectation propagation in Chapters 12 and 13; and new and revised code in Appendix C. We have made other changes throughout. During the eighteen years since completing the ﬁrst edition of Bayesian Data Analysis, we have worked on dozens of interesting applications which, for reasons of space, we are not able to add to this new edition. Many of these examples appear in our book, Data Analysis xiii This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. xiv PREFACE Using Regression and Hierarchical/Multilevel Models, as well as in our published research articles. We have made some small corrections and updates for the second printing of the third edition. Online information Additional materials, including the data used in the examples, solutions to many of the end-of-chapter exercises, and any errors found after the book goes to press, are posted at http://www.stat.columbia.edu/→gelman/book/. Feel free to send any comments to us directly. Acknowledgments We thank many students, colleagues, and friends for comments and advice and also ac- knowledge the public funding that made much of this work possible. In particular, we thank Stephen Ansolabehere, Nicholas Antoniou, Adriano Azevedo, Jarrett Barber, Richard Barker, Tom Belin, Michael Betancourt, Suzette Blanchard, Rob Calver, Brad Carlin, Bob Carpenter, Alicia Carriquiry, Samantha Cook, Alex Damour, Victor De Oliveira, Vince Dorie, David Draper, Greg Dropkin, John Emerson, Steve Fien- berg, Alex Franks, Byron Gajewski, Yuanjun Gao, Daniel Gianola, Yuri Goegebeur, David Hammill, Chad Heilig, Matt Hoﬀman, Chuanpu Hu, Zaiying Huang, Shane Jensen, Yoon- Sook Jeon, Pasi Jylanki, Jay Kadane, Jouni Kerman, Gary King, Lucien Le Cam, Yew Jin Lim, Rod Little, Tom Little, Chuanhai Liu, Xuecheng Liu, Tomoki Matsumoto, Peter McCullagh, Mary Sara McPeek, Xiao-Li Meng, Baback Moghaddam, Sergei Morozov, Tin Nguyen, Jarad Niemi, Olivier Nimeskern, Peter Norvig, Ali Rahimi, Sorin Pascu, Thomas Richardson, Christian Robert, Scott Schmidler, Matt Schoﬁeld, Andrea Siegel, Raghav Singal, Sandip Sinharay, Elizabeth Stuart, Dwight Sunada, Andrew Swift, Eric Tassone, Francis Tuerlinckx, Iven Van Mechelen, Amos Waterland, Rob Weiss, Huang Xinyang, Lo- Hua Yuan, and Alan Zaslavsky. We especially thank John Boscardin, Jessica Hwang, Daniel Lee, Phillip Price, and Radford Neal. This work was partially supported by research grants from the National Science Foun- dation, National Institutes of Health, Institute of Education Sciences, National Security Agency, Department of Energy, and Academy of Finland. Many of our examples have appeared in books and articles written by ourselves and others, as we indicate in the bibliographic notes and exercises in the chapters where they appear.1 Finally, we thank Caroline, Nancy, Hara, Amy, Ilona, and other family and friends for their love and support during the writing and revision of this book. 1In particular: Figures 1.3–1.5 are adapted from the Journal of the American Statistical Association 90 (1995), pp. 696, 702, and 703, and are reprinted with permission of the American Statistical Association. Figures 2.6 and 2.7 come from Gelman, A., and Nolan, D., Teaching Statistics: A Bag of Tricks, Oxford University Press (1992), pp. 14 and 15, and are reprinted with permission of Oxford University Press. Figures 19.8–19.10 come from the Journal of the American Statistical Association 91 (1996), pp. 1407 and 1409, and are reprinted with permission of the American Statistical Association. Table 19.1 comes from Berry, D., Statistics: A Bayesian Perspective, ﬁrst edition, copyright 1996 Wadsworth, a part of Cengage Learning, Inc. Reproduced by permission. www.cengage.com/permissions. Figures 18.1 and 18.2 come from the Journal of the American Statistical Association 93 (1998), pp. 851 and 853, and are reprinted with permission of the American Statistical Association. Figures 9.1–9.3 are adapted from the Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 21 (2003), pp. 219 and 223, and are reprinted with permission of the American Statistical Association. We thank Jack Taylor for the data used to produce Figure 23.4. This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. Part I: Fundamentals of Bayesian Inference Bayesian inference is the process of ﬁtting a probability model to a set of data and sum- marizing the result by a probability distribution on the parameters of the model and on unobserved quantities such as predictions for new observations. In Chapters 1–3, we in- troduce several useful families of models and illustrate their application in the analysis of relatively simple data structures. Some mathematics arises in the analytical manipulation of the probability distributions, notably in transformation and integration in multiparameter problems. We diﬀer somewhat from other introductions to Bayesian inference by emphasiz- ing stochastic simulation, and the combination of mathematical analysis and simulation, as general methods for summarizing distributions. Chapter 4 outlines the fundamental con- nections between Bayesian and other approaches to statistical inference. The early chapters focus on simple examples to develop the basic ideas of Bayesian inference; examples in which the Bayesian approach makes a practical diﬀerence relative to more traditional approaches begin to appear in Chapter 3. The major practical advantages of the Bayesian approach appear in Chapter 5, where we introduce hierarchical models, which allow the parameters of a prior, or population, distribution themselves to be estimated from data. 1 This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. Chapter 1 Probability and inference 1.1 The three steps of Bayesian data analysis This book is concerned with practical methods for making inferences from data using prob- ability models for quantities we observe and for quantities about which we wish to learn. The essential characteristic of Bayesian methods is their explicit use of probability for quan- tifying uncertainty in inferences based on statistical data analysis. The process of Bayesian data analysis can be idealized by dividing it into the following three steps: 1. Setting up a full probability model—a joint probability distribution for all observable and unobservable quantities in a problem. The model should be consistent with knowledge about the underlying scientiﬁc problem and the data collection process. 2. Conditioning on observed data: calculating and interpreting the appropriate posterior distribution—the conditional probability distribution of the unobserved quantities of ul- timate interest, given the observed data. 3. Evaluating the ﬁt of the model and the implications of the resulting posterior distribution: how well does the model ﬁt the data, are the substantive conclusions reasonable, and how sensitive are the results to the modeling assumptions in step 1? In response, one can alter or expand the model and repeat the three steps. Great advances in all these areas have been made in the last forty years, and many of these are reviewed and used in examples throughout the book. Our treatment covers all three steps, the second involving computational methodology and the third a delicate balance of technique and judgment, guided by the applied context of the problem. The ﬁrst step remains a major stumbling block for much Bayesian analysis: just where do our models come from? How do we go about constructing appropriate probability speciﬁcations? We provide some guidance on these issues and illustrate the importance of the third step in retrospectively evaluating the ﬁt of models. Along with the improved techniques available for computing conditional probability distributions in the second step, advances in carrying out the third step alleviate to some degree the need to assume correct model speciﬁcation at the ﬁrst attempt. In particular, the much-feared dependence of conclusions on ‘subjective’ prior distributions can be examined and explored. A primary motivation for Bayesian thinking is that it facilitates a common-sense in- terpretation of statistical conclusions. For instance, a Bayesian (probability) interval for an unknown quantity of interest can be directly regarded as having a high probability of containing the unknown quantity, in contrast to a frequentist (conﬁdence) interval, which may strictly be interpreted only in relation to a sequence of similar inferences that might be made in repeated practice. Recently in applied statistics, increased emphasis has been placed on interval estimation rather than hypothesis testing, and this provides a strong im- petus to the Bayesian viewpoint, since it seems likely that most users of standard conﬁdence intervals give them a common-sense Bayesian interpretation. One of our aims in this book 3 This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 4 1. PROBABILITY AND INFERENCE is to indicate the extent to which Bayesian interpretations of common simple statistical procedures are justiﬁed. Rather than argue the foundations of statistics—see the bibliographic note at the end of this chapter for references to foundational debates—we prefer to concentrate on the pragmatic advantages of the Bayesian framework, whose ﬂexibility and generality allow it to cope with complex problems. The central feature of Bayesian inference, the direct quantiﬁcation of uncertainty, means that there is no impediment in principle to ﬁtting models with many parameters and complicated multilayered probability speciﬁcations. In practice, the problems are ones of setting up and computing with such large models, and a large part of this book focuses on recently developed and still developing techniques for handling these modeling and computational challenges. The freedom to set up complex models arises in large part from the fact that the Bayesian paradigm provides a conceptually simple method for coping with multiple parameters, as we discuss in detail from Chapter 3 on. 1.2 General notation for statistical inference Statistical inference is concerned with drawing conclusions, from numerical data, about quantities that are not observed. For example, a clinical trial of a new cancer drug might be designed to compare the ﬁve-year survival probability in a population given the new drug to that in a population under standard treatment. These survival probabilities refer to a large population of patients, and it is neither feasible nor ethically acceptable to experiment on an entire population. Therefore inferences about the true probabilities and, in particular, their diﬀerences must be based on a sample of patients. In this example, even if it were possible to expose the entire population to one or the other treatment, it is never possible to expose anyone to both treatments, and therefore statistical inference would still be needed to assess the causal inference—the comparison between the observed outcome in each patient and that patient’s unobserved outcome if exposed to the other treatment. We distinguish between two kinds of estimands—unobserved quantities for which sta- tistical inferences are made—ﬁrst, potentially observable quantities, such as future obser- vations of a process, or the outcome under the treatment not received in the clinical trial example; and second, quantities that are not directly observable, that is, parameters that govern the hypothetical process leading to the observed data (for example, regression coef- ﬁcients). The distinction between these two kinds of estimands is not always precise, but is generally useful as a way of understanding how a statistical model for a particular problem ﬁts into the real world. Parameters, data, and predictions As general notation, we let ω denote unobservable vector quantities or population parameters of interest (such as the probabilities of survival under each treatment for randomly chosen members of the population in the example of the clinical trial), y denote the observed data (such as the numbers of survivors and deaths in each treatment group), and ˜y denote unknown, but potentially observable, quantities (such as the outcomes of the patients under the other treatment, or the outcome under each of the treatments for a new patient similar to those already in the trial). In general these symbols represent multivariate quantities. We generally use Greek letters for parameters, lower case Roman letters for observed or observable scalars and vectors (and sometimes matrices), and upper case Roman letters for observed or observable matrices. When using matrix notation, we consider vectors as column vectors throughout; for example, if u is a vector with n components, then uT u is a scalar and uuT an n × n matrix. This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 1.2. GENERAL NOTATION FOR STATISTICAL INFERENCE 5 Observational units and variables In many statistical studies, data are gathered on each of a set of n objects or units, and we can write the data as a vector, y = (y1, . . . , yn). In the clinical trial example, we might label yi as 1 if patient i is alive after ﬁve years or 0 if the patient dies. If several variables are measured on each unit, then each yi is actually a vector, and the entire dataset y is a matrix (usually taken to have n rows). The y variables are called the ‘outcomes’ and are considered ‘random’ in the sense that, when making inferences, we wish to allow for the possibility that the observed values of the variables could have turned out otherwise, due to the sampling process and the natural variation of the population. Exchangeability The usual starting point of a statistical analysis is the (often tacit) assumption that the n values yi may be regarded as exchangeable, meaning that we express uncertainty as a joint probability density p(y1, . . . , yn) that is invariant to permutations of the indexes. A nonexchangeable model would be appropriate if information relevant to the outcome were conveyed in the unit indexes rather than by explanatory variables (see below). The idea of exchangeability is fundamental to statistics, and we return to it repeatedly throughout the book. We commonly model data from an exchangeable distribution as independently and iden- tically distributed (iid) given some unknown parameter vector ω with distribution p(ω). In the clinical trial example, we might model the outcomes yi as iid, given ω, the unknown probability of survival. Explanatory variables It is common to have observations on each unit that we do not bother to model as random. In the clinical trial example, such variables might include the age and previous health status of each patient in the study. We call this second class of variables explanatory variables, or covariates, and label them x. We use X to denote the entire set of explanatory variables for all n units; if there are k explanatory variables, then X is a matrix with n rows and k columns. Treating X as random, the notion of exchangeability can be extended to require the distribution of the n values of (x, y)i to be unchanged by arbitrary permutations of the indexes. It is always appropriate to assume an exchangeable model after incorporating suﬃcient relevant information in X that the indexes can be thought of as randomly assigned. It follows from the assumption of exchangeability that the distribution of y, given x, is the same for all units in the study in the sense that if two units have the same value of x, then their distributions of y are the same. Any of the explanatory variables x can be moved into the y category if we wish to model them. We discuss the role of explanatory variables (also called predictors) in detail in Chapter 8 in the context of analyzing surveys, experiments, and observational studies, and in the later parts of this book in the context of regression models. Hierarchical modeling In Chapter 5 and subsequent chapters, we focus on hierarchical models (also called mul- tilevel models), which are used when information is available on several diﬀerent levels of observational units. In a hierarchical model, it is possible to speak of exchangeability at each level of units. For example, suppose two medical treatments are applied, in separate randomized experiments, to patients in several diﬀerent cities. Then, if no other information were available, it would be reasonable to treat the patients within each city as exchangeable This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 6 1. PROBABILITY AND INFERENCE and also treat the results from diﬀerent cities as themselves exchangeable. In practice it would make sense to include, as explanatory variables at the city level, whatever relevant information we have on each city, as well as the explanatory variables mentioned before at the individual level, and then the conditional distributions given these explanatory variables would be exchangeable. 1.3 Bayesian inference Bayesian statistical conclusions about a parameter ω, or unobserved data ˜y, are made in terms of probability statements. These probability statements are conditional on the ob- served value of y, and in our notation are written simply as p(ω|y) or p(˜y|y). We also implicitly condition on the known values of any covariates, x. It is at the fundamental level of conditioning on observed data that Bayesian inference departs from the approach to statistical inference described in many textbooks, which is based on a retrospective eval- uation of the procedure used to estimate ω (or ˜y) over the distribution of possible y values conditional on the true unknown value of ω. Despite this diﬀerence, it will be seen that in many simple analyses, superﬁcially similar conclusions result from the two approaches to statistical inference. However, analyses obtained using Bayesian methods can be easily extended to more complex problems. In this section, we present the basic mathematics and notation of Bayesian inference, followed in the next section by an example from genetics. Probability notation Some comments on notation are needed at this point. First, p(·|·) denotes a conditional probability density with the arguments determined by the context, and similarly for p(·), which denotes a marginal distribution. We use the terms ‘distribution’ and ‘density’ interchangeably. The same notation is used for continuous density functions and discrete probability mass functions. Diﬀerent distributions in the same equation (or expression) will each be denoted by p(·), as in (1.1) below, for example. Although an abuse of standard mathematical notation, this method is compact and similar to the standard practice of using p(·) for the probability of any discrete event, where the sample space is also suppressed in the notation. Depending on context, to avoid confusion, we may use the notation Pr(·) for the probability of an event; for example, Pr(ω > 2) = ! θ>2 p(ω)dω. When using a standard distribution, we use a notation based on the name of the distribution; for example, if ω has a normal distribution with mean µ and variance σ2, we write ω →N(µ, σ2) or p(ω) = N(ω|µ, σ2) or, to be even more explicit, p(ω|µ, σ2) = N(ω|µ, σ2). Throughout, we use notation such as N(µ, σ2) for random variables and N(ω|µ, σ2) for density functions. Notation and formulas for several standard distributions appear in Appendix A. We also occasionally use the following expressions for random variables ω: the coeﬃ- cient of variation is deﬁned as sd(ω)/E(ω), the geometric mean is exp(E[log(ω)]), and the geometric standard deviation is exp(sd[log(ω)]). Bayes’ rule In order to make probability statements about ω given y, we must begin with a model providing a joint probability distribution for ω and y. The joint probability mass or density function can be written as a product of two densities that are often referred to as the prior distribution p(ω) and the sampling distribution (or data distribution) p(y|ω), respectively: p(ω, y) = p(ω)p(y|ω). This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 1.3. BAYESIAN INFERENCE 7 Simply conditioning on the known value of the data y, using the basic property of conditional probability known as Bayes’ rule, yields the posterior density: p(ω|y) = p(ω, y) p(y) = p(ω)p(y|ω) p(y) , (1.1) where p(y) = " θp(ω)p(y|ω), and the sum is over all possible values of ω (or p(y) = ! p(ω)p(y|ω)dω in the case of continuous ω). An equivalent form of (1.1) omits the fac- tor p(y), which does not depend on ω and, with ﬁxed y, can thus be considered a constant, yielding the unnormalized posterior density, which is the right side of (1.2): p(ω|y) ∝p(ω)p(y|ω). (1.2) The second term in this expression, p(y|ω), is taken here as a function of ω, not of y. These simple formulas encapsulate the technical core of Bayesian inference: the primary task of any speciﬁc application is to develop the model p(ω, y) and perform the computations to summarize p(ω|y) in appropriate ways. Prediction To make inferences about an unknown observable, often called predictive inferences, we follow a similar logic. Before the data y are considered, the distribution of the unknown but observable y is p(y) = # p(y, ω)dω = # p(ω)p(y|ω)dω. (1.3) This is often called the marginal distribution of y, but a more informative name is the prior predictive distribution: prior because it is not conditional on a previous observation of the process, and predictive because it is the distribution for a quantity that is observable. After the data y have been observed, we can predict an unknown observable, ˜y, from the same process. For example, y = (y1, . . . , yn) may be the vector of recorded weights of an object weighed n times on a scale, ω = (µ, σ2) may be the unknown true weight of the object and the measurement variance of the scale, and ˜y may be the yet to be recorded weight of the object in a planned new weighing. The distribution of ˜y is called the posterior predictive distribution, posterior because it is conditional on the observed y and predictive because it is a prediction for an observable ˜y: p(˜y|y) = # p(˜y, ω|y)dω = # p(˜y|ω, y)p(ω|y)dω = # p(˜y|ω)p(ω|y)dω. (1.4) The second and third lines display the posterior predictive distribution as an average of conditional predictions over the posterior distribution of ω. The last step follows from the assumed conditional independence of y and ˜y given ω. Likelihood Using Bayes’ rule with a chosen probability model means that the data y aﬀect the posterior inference (1.2) only through p(y|ω), which, when regarded as a function of ω, for ﬁxed y, is called the likelihood function. In this way Bayesian inference is obeying what is sometimes called the likelihood principle. This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 8 1. PROBABILITY AND INFERENCE The likelihood principle is reasonable, but only within the framework of the model or family of models adopted for a particular analysis. In practice, one can rarely be conﬁdent that the chosen model is correct. We shall see in Chapter 6 that sampling distributions (imagining repeated realizations of our data) can play an important role in checking model assumptions. In fact, our view of an applied Bayesian statistician is one who is willing to apply Bayes’ rule under a variety of possible models. Likelihood and odds ratios The ratio of the posterior density p(ω|y) evaluated at the points ω1 and ω2 under a given model is called the posterior odds for ω1 compared to ω2. The most familiar application of this concept is with discrete parameters, with ω2 taken to be the complement of ω1. Odds provide an alternative representation of probabilities and have the attractive property that Bayes’ rule takes a particularly simple form when expressed in terms of them: p(ω1|y) p(ω2|y) = p(ω1)p(y|ω1)/p(y) p(ω2)p(y|ω2)/p(y) = p(ω1) p(ω2) p(y|ω1) p(y|ω2). (1.5) In words, the posterior odds are equal to the prior odds multiplied by the likelihood ratio, p(y|ω1)/p(y|ω2). 1.4 Discrete examples: genetics and spell checking We next demonstrate Bayes’ theorem with two examples in which the immediate goal is inference about a particular discrete quantity rather than with the estimation of a parameter that describes an entire population. These discrete examples allow us to see the prior, likelihood, and posterior probabilities directly. Inference about a genetic status Human males have one X-chromosome and one Y-chromosome, whereas females have two X-chromosomes, each chromosome being inherited from one parent. Hemophilia is a disease that exhibits X-chromosome-linked recessive inheritance, meaning that a male who inherits the gene that causes the disease on the X-chromosome is aﬀected, whereas a female carrying the gene on only one of her two X-chromosomes is not aﬀected. The disease is generally fatal for women who inherit two such genes, and this is rare, since the frequency of occurrence of the gene is low in human populations. Prior distribution. Consider a woman who has an aﬀected brother, which implies that her mother must be a carrier of the hemophilia gene with one ‘good’ and one ‘bad’ hemophilia gene. We are also told that her father is not aﬀected; thus the woman herself has a ﬁfty-ﬁfty chance of having the gene. The unknown quantity of interest, the state of the woman, has just two values: the woman is either a carrier of the gene (ω = 1) or not (ω = 0). Based on the information provided thus far, the prior distribution for the unknown ω can be expressed simply as Pr(ω = 1) = Pr(ω = 0) = 1 2. Data model and likelihood. The data used to update the prior information consist of the aﬀection status of the woman’s sons. Suppose she has two sons, neither of whom is aﬀected. Let yi =1 or 0 denote an aﬀected or unaﬀected son, respectively. The outcomes of the two sons are exchangeable and, conditional on the unknown ω, are independent; we assume the sons are not identical twins. The two items of independent data generate the following likelihood function: Pr(y1 =0, y2 = 0 | ω=1) = (0.5)(0.5) = 0.25 Pr(y1 =0, y2 = 0 | ω=0) = (1)(1) = 1. This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 1.4. DISCRETE EXAMPLES: GENETICS AND SPELL CHECKING 9 These expressions follow from the fact that if the woman is a carrier, then each of her sons will have a 50% chance of inheriting the gene and so being aﬀected, whereas if she is not a carrier then there is a probability close to 1 that a son of hers will be unaﬀected. (In fact, there is a nonzero probability of being aﬀected even if the mother is not a carrier, but this risk—the mutation rate—is small and can be ignored for this example.) Posterior distribution. Bayes’ rule can now be used to combine the information in the data with the prior probability; in particular, interest is likely to focus on the posterior probability that the woman is a carrier. Using y to denote the joint data (y1, y2), this is simply Pr(ω = 1|y) = p(y|ω = 1)Pr(ω = 1) p(y|ω = 1)Pr(ω = 1) + p(y|ω = 0)Pr(ω = 0) = (0.25)(0.5) (0.25)(0.5) + (1.0)(0.5) = 0.125 0.625 = 0.20. Intuitively it is clear that if a woman has unaﬀected children, it is less probable that she is a carrier, and Bayes’ rule provides a formal mechanism for determining the extent of the correction. The results can also be described in terms of prior and posterior odds. The prior odds of the woman being a carrier are 0.5/0.5 = 1. The likelihood ratio based on the information about her two unaﬀected sons is 0.25/1 = 0.25, so the posterior odds are 1 ·0.25 = 0.25. Converting back to a probability, we obtain 0.25/(1 + 0.25) = 0.2, as before. Adding more data. A key aspect of Bayesian analysis is the ease with which sequential analyses can be performed. For example, suppose that the woman has a third son, who is also unaﬀected. The entire calculation does not need to be redone; rather we use the previous posterior distribution as the new prior distribution, to obtain: Pr(ω = 1|y1, y2, y3) = (0.5)(0.20) (0.5)(0.20) + (1)(0.8) = 0.111. Alternatively, if we suppose that the third son is aﬀected, it is easy to check that the posterior probability of the woman being a carrier becomes 1 (again ignoring the possibility of a mutation). Spelling correction Classiﬁcation of words is a problem of managing uncertainty. For example, suppose someone types ‘radom.’ How should that be read? It could be a misspelling or mistyping of ‘random’ or ‘radon’ or some other alternative, or it could be the intentional typing of ‘radom’ (as in its ﬁrst use in this paragraph). What is the probability that ‘radom’ actually means random? If we label y as the data and ω as the word that the person was intending to type, then Pr(ω | y=‘radom’) ∝p(ω) Pr(y=‘radom’ | ω). (1.6) This product is the unnormalized posterior density. In this case, if for simplicity we consider only three possibilities for the intended word, ω (random, radon, or radom), we can compute the posterior probability of interest by ﬁrst computing the unnormalized density for all three values of theta and then normalizing: p(random|‘radom’) = p(ω1)p(‘radom’|ω1) "3 j=1 p(ωj)p(‘radom’|ωj) , where ω1=random, ω2=radon, and ω3=radom. The prior probabilities p(ωj) can most simply come from frequencies of these words in some large database, ideally one that is adapted This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 10 1. PROBABILITY AND INFERENCE to the problem at hand (for example, a database of recent student emails if the word in question is appearing in such a document). The likelihoods p(y|ωj) can come from some modeling of spelling and typing errors, perhaps ﬁt using some study in which people were followed up after writing emails to identify any questionable words. Prior distribution. Without any other context, it makes sense to assign the prior proba- bilities p(ωj) based on the relative frequencies of these three words in some databases. Here are probabilities supplied by researchers at Google: ω p(ω) random 7.60 × 10→5 radon 6.05 × 10→6 radom 3.12 × 10→7 Since we are considering only these possibilities, we could renormalize the three numbers to sum to 1 (p(random) = 760 760+60.5+3.12, etc.) but there is no need, as the adjustment would merely be absorbed into the proportionality constant in (1.6). Returning to the table above, we were surprised to see the probability of ‘radom’ in the corpus being as high as it was. We looked up the word in Wikipedia and found that it is a medium-sized city: home to ‘the largest and best-attended air show in Poland . . . also the popular unoﬃcial name for a semiautomatic 9 mm Para pistol of Polish design . . . ’ For the documents that we encounter, the relative probability of ‘radom’ seems much too high. If the probabilities above do not seem appropriate for our application, this implies that we have prior information or beliefs that have not yet been included in the model. We shall return to this point after ﬁrst working out the model’s implications for this example. Likelihood. Here are some conditional probabilities from Google’s model of spelling and typing errors: ω p(‘radom’|ω) random 0.00193 radon 0.000143 radom 0.975 We emphasize that this likelihood function is not a probability distribution. Rather, it is a set of conditional probabilities of a particular outcome (‘radom’) from three diﬀerent proba- bility distributions, corresponding to three diﬀerent possibilities for the unknown parameter ω. These particular values look reasonable enough—a 97% chance that this particular ﬁve- letter word will be typed correctly, a 0.2% chance of obtaining this character string by mistakenly dropping a letter from ‘random,’ and a much lower chance of obtaining it by mistyping the ﬁnal letter of ‘radon.’ We have no strong intuition about these probabilities and will trust the Google engineers here. Posterior distribution. We multiply the prior probability and the likelihood to get joint probabilities and then renormalize to get posterior probabilities: ω p(ω)p(‘radom’|ω) p(ω|‘radom’) random 1.47 × 10→7 0.325 radon 8.65 × 10→10 0.002 radom 3.04 × 10→7 0.673 Thus, conditional on the model, the typed word ‘radom’ is about twice as likely to be correct as to be a typographical error for ‘random,’ and it is very unlikely to be a mistaken instance of ‘radon.’ A fuller analysis would include possibilities beyond these three words, but the basic idea is the same. Decision making, model checking, and model improvement. We can envision two directions to go from here. The ﬁrst approach is to accept the two-thirds probability that the word This electronic edition is for non-commercial purposes only. 1.5. PROBABILITY AS A MEASURE OF UNCERTAINTY 11 was typed correctly or even to simply declare ‘radom’ as correct on ﬁrst pass. The second option would be to question this probability by saying, for example, that ‘radom’ looks like a typo and that the estimated probability of it being correct seems much too high. When we dispute the claims of a posterior distribution, we are saying that the model does not ﬁt the data or that we have additional prior information not included in the model so far. In this case, we are only examining one word so lack of ﬁt is not the issue; thus a dispute over the posterior must correspond to a claim of additional information, either in the prior or the likelihood. For this problem we have no particular grounds on which to criticize the likelihood. The prior probabilities, on the other hand, are highly context dependent. The word ‘random’ is of course highly frequent in our own writing on statistics, ‘radon’ occurs occasionally (see Section 9.4), while ‘radom’ was entirely new to us. Our surprise at the high probability of ‘radom’ represents additional knowledge relevant to our particular problem. The model can be elaborated most immediately by including contextual information in the prior probabilities. For example, if the document under study is a statistics book, then it becomes more likely that the person intended to type ‘random.’ If we label x as the contextual information used by the model, the Bayesian calculation then becomes, p(ω|x, y) ∝p(ω|x)p(y|ω, x). To ﬁrst approximation, we can simplify that last term to p(y|ω), so that the probability of any particular error (that is, the probability of typing a particular string y given the intended word ω) does not depend on context. This is not a perfect assumption but could reduce the burden of modeling and computation. The practical challenges in Bayesian inference involve setting up models to estimate all these probabilities from data. At that point, as shown above, Bayes’ rule can be easily applied to determine the implications of the model for the problem at hand. 1.5 Probability as a measure of uncertainty We have already used concepts such as probability density, and indeed we assume that the reader has a fair degree of familiarity with basic probability theory (although in Section 1.8 we provide a brief technical review of some probability calculations that often arise in Bayesian analysis). But since the uses of probability within a Bayesian framework are much broader than within non-Bayesian statistics, it is important to consider at least brieﬂy the foundations of the concept of probability before considering more detailed statistical examples. We take for granted a common understanding on the part of the reader of the mathematical deﬁnition of probability: that probabilities are numerical quantities, deﬁned on a set of ‘outcomes,’ that are nonnegative, additive over mutually exclusive outcomes, and sum to 1 over all possible mutually exclusive outcomes. In Bayesian statistics, probability is used as the fundamental measure or yardstick of uncertainty. Within this paradigm, it is equally legitimate to discuss the probability of ‘rain tomorrow’ or of a Brazilian victory in the soccer World Cup as it is to discuss the probability that a coin toss will land heads. Hence, it becomes as natural to consider the probability that an unknown estimand lies in a particular range of values as it is to consider the probability that the mean of a random sample of 10 items from a known ﬁxed population of size 100 will lie in a certain range. The ﬁrst of th
