---
id: 601
url: https://towardsdatascience.com/building-a-research-agent-that-can-write-to-google-docs-part-1-4b49ea05a292/
title: Building a Research Agent That Can Write to Google Docs (Part 1) | Towards
  Data Science
domain: towardsdatascience.com
source_date: '2025-02-04'
tags:
- llm
- ai
- tutorial
- python
summary: This article introduces a two-part series on building a research agent using
  LangGraph and Tavily that autonomously plans, researches, writes, and refines articles
  on any topic. The agent mimics the peer-review cycle by having specialized components
  (Planner, Researcher, Writer, Reviewer, and Editor) that iteratively improve content
  quality, with the second part covering integration with Google Docs for document
  management. The project demonstrates how LLMs can be orchestrated as semi-autonomous
  systems to speed up research and content creation, while acknowledging that such
  tools complement rather than replace human learning and critical analysis.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Building a Research Agent That Can Write to Google Docs (Part 1) | Towards Data Science

Building a Research Agent That Can Write to Google Docs (Part 1) A tool that might help with your homework Robert Martin-Short Nov 20, 2024 18 min read Share Dalle-3’s interpretation of “A quirky AI assistant hard at work checking documents”. Image generated by the author. _ This article is the first of a two part series where we use LangGraph and Tavily to build a simple research agent, which writes and refines short articles. To keep track of the plans, articles and comments it generates we add the ability to programmatically create and edit Google Docs. In this article we focus on the agent, leaving the docs connection to the second article. You can find all the relevant code here . _ Large Language Models (LLMs) are quickly finding use in all sorts of applications relevant to analysts and researchers, especially when it comes to the extraction, organization and summarization of text information. The community – both commercial and open source – is also making it increasingly easy to build and scale so-called "agentic" applications, in which the LLM assumes the role of a (hopefully) skilled analyst and makes semi-autonomous decisions. In a chatbot application, for example, if the user asks a complex or multi-step query the LLM might need to design a plan of action, correctly query multiple external tools – perhaps calculators, web searchers, vector databases etc – assemble the results and generate an answer. Systems like this are often said to use the ReAct framework of prompt engineering, which stands for "Reasoning-Action". Basically, the structure and sequence of prompts forces the LLM to answer the question in very methodical fashion, first by articulating a thought (typically a plan of attack), carrying out an action, then making an observation of the result. In agentic systems, this process can continue iteratively until the LLM decides that it’s come to an acceptable answer. In this series of articles, we’ll use the LangGraph library and Tavily search tool to build a simple research assistant that demonstrates some of these concepts and might even be useful for those of us looking to generate quick, well written reports about any subject. Our agent will be inspired by the plan -> research -> write -> submit -> review -> revise cycle that happens in peer-reviewed research, and you can take a look at the prompts for these different sections here . To make the system feel more complete, we’ll also add the ability to automatically add the material generated to a Google Doc, which is explored in part 2 . This should be considered as more of an add-on than an integrated component of the agent, but it is interesting in its own right and so could also be read as a stand-alone article. 1. What should our research assistant do? Before looking at how we can build this assistant and what it means for it to be "agentic", we should think briefly about what we’d like it to do. The goal is to build a system that can plan and write short, informative articles about a given topic, then improve its own work through review and revision. Why? Mainly this is just an exploration of technology, but the use of LLMs as semi-autonomous researchers is an active field of investigation and is yielding interesting projects such as GPT-researcher . They have the potential to speed up the work of analysts, students, authors and researchers – though of course if the goal is human learning, there is no substitute for careful reading, note taking and discussion, which AI cannot replace. LLMs like GPT4, Anthropic Claude Sonnet, Meta Llama 3, Google Gemini Pro etc. can already write great articles out of the box with just a single prompt. However, these LLMs have knowledge cutoffs and so need access to additional tools in order to fetch the latest information, such as news about current events. There are plenty of services – notably tools like Perplexity, ChatGPT (now accessible via chat.com) and Google’s AI overview that already have this ability, but they are geared more towards providing quick summaries than polished research reports. Here, we’re making the assumption that multiple iterations of review and revision will improve the quality of an article generated by an LLM. This is certainly how it works in human writing. Our assistant will have the following components, each with its own instruction prompt Planner. Turns a poorly defined task into a structured article plan Researcher. Takes the plan and searches the internet for relevant content. Writer. Uses the plan, retrieved content and it own knowledge to write the report Reviewer. Reads the report and offers constructive criticism Editor. Reads the report and the reviewer’s criticism and decides if the report needs to be revised. If so, the report is sent back to the researcher and writer stages. In our implementation each of these components will be calling the same LLM, namely GPT4o-mini, but in a real application they could just as easily use different, more specialized models. The output will be a well-written, informative report – preferably with references – that we can programmatically drop into a Google doc for safe keeping. It’s easy to modify the "personality" or our researcher by adapting the prompts. The editor is particularly important, because it’s the gatekeeper for the end of the process. If we make our editor very strict, the system might need to loop through many revisions to get accepted. To what extent will a stricter editor improve the quality of the result? That’s a very interesting question which, as they say, is beyond the scope of the current work! 2. Structure of the agent Our research assistant is based heavily on the example described in this excellent short course about LangGraph . LangGraph is an LLM orchestration library that attempts to make it easier for us to design and build reliable agents. For an in-depth comparison of LangGraph and LangChain, I recommend this excellent article . What exactly is an agent? It appears that the community has not yet settled on a definition, but at least broadly speaking we might say that an agent is a multi-step system where an LLM is allowed to make meaningful decisions about the outcome . This makes it more complex (and potentially more unpredictable) than a chain, which is just a predefined set of LLM calls one after the other. In an agent framework, the LLM has some autonomy over how to solve the problem it’s given, perhaps by choosing the appropriate tool to call or deciding when to stop refining a solution once it’s good enough. In that sense the LLM becomes more of the brain of the system, acting more like a human analyst than just an API call. One interesting challenge here is that while agents might be free to make decisions, they are usually embedded within or interact with traditional software systems that require structured inputs and outputs. It’s therefore very important to force the agent to return its answers in the way that these other systems understand, regardless of the decision it makes. For a more in-depth discussion of agents in the context of LangGraph, this documentation is very helpful. Our research agent will be quite a simple one (partly because I am still learning this material too!) but hopefully could be a stepping stone towards something more sophisticated. In LangGraph we define the logic of our system as a graph, which consists of nodes and edges. Nodes are where LLM calls are made, and edges pass information from one node to the next. Edges can be conditional, meaning that they can direct information to different nodes depending on what decision is made. Information is passed between nodes in a structured format defined by a state. Our research assistant has a single stage called AgentState and it looks like this class AgentState(TypedDict): """ A dictionary representing the state of the research agent. Attributes: task (str): The description of the task to be performed. plan (str): The research plan generated for the task. draft (str): The current draft of the research report. critique (str): The critique received for the draft. content (List[str]): A list of content gathered during research. revision_number (int): The current revision number of the draft. max_revisions (int): The maximum number of revisions allowed. finalized_state (bool): Indicates whether the report is finalized. """ task: str plan: str draft: str critique: str content: List[str] editor_comment: str revision_number: int max_revisions: int finalized_state: bool This is where all the information relevant to our problem gets stored, and can be updated by LLM action inside a node of the graph. Now we can define some nodes. In the code, all the nodes are kept within the AgentNodes class, which is just a way I found helpful to group them. For example the planner node looks like this def plan_node(self, state: AgentState) -> Dict[str, str]: """ Generate a research plan based on the current state. Args: state (AgentState): The current state of the research agent. Returns: Dict[str, str]: A dictionary containing the generated research plan. """ messages = [ SystemMessage(content=ResearchPlanPrompt.system_template), HumanMessage(content=state["task"]), ] response = self.model.invoke(messages) return {"plan": response.content} Note how it takes in an AgentState and returns a modification to one of its components, namely the text for the research plan. When this node is run, the plan is updated. The code inside the node function uses standard LangChain syntax. self.model is an instance of ChatOpenAI , which looks like this model = ChatOpenAI( model="gpt-4o-mini", temperature=0, api_key=secrets["OPENAI_API_KEY"] ) The prompt consists of a system message from the ResearchPlanPrompt dataclass concatenated with the "task" element of the AgentState, which is the research topic provided by the user. The plan prompt looks like this. @dataclass class ResearchPlanPrompt: system_template: str = """ You are an expert writer tas
