---
id: 465
url: https://obsidian.rocks/dataview-in-obsidian-a-beginners-guide/
title: 'Dataview in Obsidian: A Beginner&#039;s Guide - Obsidian Rocks'
domain: obsidian.rocks
source_date: '2025-05-18'
tags:
- tutorial
- web-dev
summary: Dataview is a powerful Obsidian plugin that automates vault management by
  querying and displaying note metadata in various formats (tables, lists, tasks,
  calendars). The guide covers fundamental concepts including how to limit queries
  using folders and tags, work with built-in and custom metadata, and filter/sort
  results to accomplish tasks like creating dynamic MOCs, listing upcoming events,
  and tracking goals. It's designed as a beginner-friendly introduction with practical
  "recipes" for common use cases.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Dataview in Obsidian: A Beginner&#039;s Guide - Obsidian Rocks

Posted on March 2, 2023 · January 3, 2024 by Tim Miller Obsidian is a great notetaking app. The built-in features are excellent and more than enough for basic notetaking purposes. However , if you want to get more out of Obsidian—if you want to give Obsidian superpowers , per se—then you have to check out Dataview. Out of all the great community plugins, Dataview is my favorite. Dataview allows me to automate aspects of my vault, particularly things that would be tiresome or hard to do manually. For example, Dataview allows me to quickly and effortlessly create MOCs . This trick alone has made it much easier for me to keep my notes organized. Here are a few other examples of things I do with Dataview: List tasks that are due today List upcoming birthdays for people in my vault Create a table that shows daily or weekly goal completions Create dynamic graphs that show metrics from my vault And SO much more Want to learn how to automate your own vault with Dataview? Well then, let’s get started. On This Page 1 Table of Contents 2 The fundamentals of Dataview 3 Limiting your Dataview queries 3.1 Limiting to folders 3.2 Limiting to tags 3.3 Combining sources 4 Different types of data in Dataview 4.1 Built-in data 4.2 Adding custom data to your notes 5 Removing results from your query 5.1 How to filter results 5.2 Sorting results 5.3 Limiting 6 Tasks and Dataview 7 Not interested in the nuts and bolts? Here are a few “recipes” to get you started 7.1 List files created in the last week 7.2 List tagged notes in order of last edits 7.3 List unlinked files 7.4 List Workout Logs (or any other habit!) 7.5 List Completed Tasks 7.6 Edit Dataview Tables Inline 8 Conclusion and More Resources Table of Contents The fundamentals of Dataview Limiting your queries Types of data in Dataview Built-in data Adding custom data to your notes Excluding results from your query Filtering Sorting Limiting Tasks and Dataview Not interested in the nuts and bolts? Start here. Conclusion / More Resources The fundamentals of Dataview Getting started with Dataview can be tricky. But if you have an Obsidian vault set up with a few files in it, then you have everything you need to get started. If not, try downloading this practice vault . To start with, it’s important to keep in mind that Dataview helps you view data, it doesn’t help you to edit it. A Dataview query pulls notes from your vault but it never changes them, so there’s no risk of destroying your hard earned notes with Dataview. Note: there’s a new version of Dataview called Datacore that is built by the same developer. Datacore promises to help you edit data better than Dataview can. It isn’t ready for prime time yet, but we’ll write about it when it is. There are four primary formats you can use to display data in Dataview. They are: Table List Task Calendar Now, if we run a query with each of these formats, the results look different. We have the same data, but Dataview displays it in the requested format. The four different formats offered by Dataview look something like this: The four formats offered by Dataview. Typically you’ll use either table or list queries. The other two are more situational. Additionally, the format is the only mandatory command in Dataview. Your first Dataview query could be as simple as this: ```dataview LIST ``` The above query will create a list that includes all the files in your vault . But if you have a big vault, this query is slow and not very useful. Typically you’ll want to scope your query to a specific folder. Let’s talk about that next. Limiting your Dataview queries Typically you don’t want to view all of the notes in your vault with a given Dataview query. You’ll want to limit the scope of your query using a source . Limiting to folders Including a source tells Dataview where to look for the data you’re trying to pull. The simplest source is a folder, and you can limit your search to a folder using this syntax: ```dataview LIST FROM "A Folder" ``` Notice the quotes: the quotes tell Dataview to look for a file or folder. You can also limit it to individual files or subfolders using standard file syntax. E.g. FROM "A Folder/Subfolder" or FROM "A Folder/Subfolder/File.md" Limiting to tags Another way to limit your results is to pull based on tags. In Obsidian, you can add a tag to any file by using a hashtag, e.g. #tag . Then you can pull any files that include that tag with Dataview: ```dataview LIST FROM #tag ``` Note: you can also do this tag search with the built-in search plugin. If you aren’t quite ready to adopt Dataview, take a look at embedded searches . Tag searches are also useful with nested tags . I find it very useful to use nested tags for project statuses , and then I can pull all projects using the #project tag, or I can scope it to a particular status such as #project/soon or #project/active . Nested tags are great for indicating the status of a file, whether you’re [[growing your digital garden]] or managing projects. Combining sources Folders and tags are the two primary ways we source data with Dataview. But you can also combine the two sources to make more complex queries. You can do this by using the AND and OR operators. You can also use parenthesis to specify the logical order of these statements (it’s like highschool math: anything in parenthesis goes first): ```dataview LIST FROM "Projects" AND (#project/active OR #project/soon) ``` Different types of data in Dataview Next we need to talk about the different types of data in Dataview. There’s one thing you cannot query in Dataview: the contents of your notes. To keep Dataview speedy, you aren’t able to search the actual contents of your notes with Dataview. This sounds like a big limitation, but with some careful thought and attention it’s not as limiting as it sounds. If you do want to embed search results in your notes, you can do that with the built-in search plugin . What Dataview does do is includes a bunch of built-in metadata for each of your notes, allowing you to pull your notes quickly based on any number of different factors. Additionally, you can add your own metadata to notes if you require it. Let’s go over those two types of data. Built-in data Dataview gives you a ton of control with a bunch of built-in metadata for all of your notes. As soon as you enable the Dataview plugin it works behind the scenes to create this data, so you can use it at any time. Here’s a complete list of all the data that Dataview creates, borrowed from the documentation : Field Name Description file.name The file name as seen in Obsidians sidebar. file.folder The path of the folder this file belongs to. file.path The full file path, including the files name. file.ext The extension of the file type; generally md . file.link A link to the file. file.size The size (in bytes) of the file. file.ctime with Time The date that the file was created. file.cday The date that the file was created. file.mtime with Time The date that the file was last modified. file.mday The date that the file was last modified. file.tags A list of all unique tags in the note. Subtags are broken down by each level, so #Tag/1/A will be stored in the list as [#Tag, #Tag/1, #Tag/1/A] . file.etags A list of all explicit tags in the note; unlike file.tags , does not break subtags down, i.e. [#Tag/1/A] file.inlinks A list of all incoming links to this file, meaning all files that contain a link to this file. file.outlinks A list of all outgoing links from this file, meaning all links the file contains. file.aliases A list of all aliases for the note as defined via the YAML frontmatter . file.tasks A list of all tasks (I.e., |[ ] some task ) in this file. file.lists A list of all list elements in the file (including tasks); these elements are effectively tasks and can be rendered in task views. file.frontmatter Contains the raw values of all frontmatter in form of key |value text values; mainly useful for checking raw frontmatter values or for dynamically listing frontmatter keys. file.day Only available if the file has a date inside its file name (of form yyyy-mm-dd or yyyymmdd ), or has a Date field/inline field. file.starred if this file has been starred via the Obsidian Core Plugin “Starred Files”. It’s not a bad idea to save the above table as a note for your own reference. When working with Dataview, it’s a handy thing to have on hand. ( here’s a Markdown version you can copy/paste ) Any of the above data can be used in any Dataview query. For example, we could create a table with all of our starred notes like this: ```dataview TABLE file.starred AS "⭐" WHERE file.starred = true ``` Note: Notice that you can change table headers using the AS keyword. In the above example, the table name will be a star icon rather than the default “file.starred”. Adding custom data to your notes In addition to the data above, you can also add your own custom data to any note. You can use this for anything you could imagine. To add custom data, you can either add Properties, or you can use the double-colon syntax. Properties are added at the top of your document (or in the sidebar), and are useful for all sorts of things. If you’re not familiar with Properties, check out our Introduction to Obsidian Properties and Five Pro Tips for Obsidian Properties . Properties are cleaner if you have a lot of data to add, but if you only have a few things, then Dataview has another syntax that is only used for Dataview. This data can be added anywhere within your note, and it looks like this: date:: 202302280654 aliases:: ['data'] status:: Idea Both Properties and the metadata above can be queried with Dataview, like this: ```dataview LIST WHERE status = "Idea" ``` Removing results from your query The two queries above use a WHERE statement, which we haven’t talked about yet. WHERE is one way to exclude results from a query. Excluding results is where magic happens. Viewing notes by tag or folder is all well and good, there’s only so much
