---
id: 35
url: https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~pavlo/blog/2026/01/2025-databases-retrospective.html
title: 'Databases in 2025: A Year in Review // Blog // Andy Pavlo - Carnegie Mellon
  University'
domain: www.cs.cmu.edu
source_date: '2026-01-05'
tags:
- database
- academic-paper
- distributed-systems
summary: In 2025, PostgreSQL continued its dominance in the database world, with major
  acquisitions and new initiatives from tech giants like Databricks, Snowflake, and
  Microsoft investing billions in PostgreSQL-based services and DBaaS offerings. The
  year saw significant developments including PostgreSQL v18's new asynchronous I/O
  storage subsystem and growing momentum around distributed PostgreSQL projects (Multigres,
  Neki, and PgDog) that aim to add horizontal scaling capabilities similar to existing
  MySQL sharding solutions. Key takeaways include the consolidation of the PostgreSQL
  ecosystem through M&A activity, the emergence of competing open-source sharding
  middleware projects, and the establishment of PostgreSQL offerings across all major
  cloud vendors, solidifying its position as the dominant database platform.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Databases in 2025: A Year in Review // Blog // Andy Pavlo - Carnegie Mellon University

Another year passes. I was hoping to write more articles instead of just these end-of-the-year screeds, but I almost died in the spring semester, and it sucked up my time. Nevertheless, I will go through what I think are the major trends and happenings in databases over the last year. There were many exciting and unprecedented developments in the world of databases. Vibe coding entered the vernacular. The Wu-Tang Clan announced their time capsule project . Rather than raising one massive funding round this year instead of going public, Databricks raised two massive rounds instead of going public. Meanwhile, other events were expected and less surprising. Redis Ltd. switched their license back one year after their rugpull (I called this shot last year ). SurrealDB reported great benchmark numbers because they weren't flushing writes to disk and lost data . And Coldplay can break up your marriage . Astronomer did make some pretty good lemonade on that last one though. Before I begin, I want to address the question I get every year in the comments about these articles. People always ask why I don't mention a particular system , database , or company in my analysis. I can only write about so many things, and unless something interesting/notable happened in the past year, then there is nothing to discuss. But not all notable database events are appropriate for me to opine about. For example, the recent attempt to unmask the AvgDatabase CEO is fair game, but the MongoDB suicide lawsuit is decidedly not. With that out of the way, let's do this. These articles are getting longer each year, so I apologize in advance. Previous entries: Databases in 2024: A Year in Review Databases in 2023: A Year in Review Databases in 2022: A Year in Review Databases in 2021: A Year in Review The Dominance of PostgreSQL Continues I first wrote about how PostgreSQL was eating the database world in 2021. That trend continues unabated as most of the most interesting developments in the database world are happening once again with PostgreSQL. The DBMS's latest version ( v18 ) dropped in November 2025. The most prominent feature is the new asynchronous I/O storage subsystem , which will finally put PostgreSQL on the path to dropping its reliance on the OS page cache. It also added support for skip scans ; queries can still use multi-key B+Tree indexes even if they are missing the leading keys (i.e., prefix). There are some additional improvements to the query optimizer (e.g., removing superfluous self-joins ). Savvy database connoisseurs will be quick to point out that these are not groundbreaking features and that other DBMSs have had them for years. PostgreSQL is the only major DBMS still relying on the OS page cache. And Oracle has supported skip scans since 2002 (v9i)! You may wonder, therefore, why I am claiming that the hottest action in databases for 2025 happened with PostgreSQL? The reason is that most of the database energy and activity is going into PostgreSQL companies, offerings, projects, and derivative systems. Acquisitions + Releases: In the last year, the hottest data start-up ( Databricks ) paid $1b for a PostgreSQL DBaaS company ( Neon ). Next, one of the biggest database companies in the world ( Snowflake ) paid $250m for another PostgreSQL DBaaS company ( CrunchyData ). Then, one of the biggest tech companies on the planet (Microsoft) launched a new PostgreSQL DBaaS ( HorizonDB ). Neon and HorizonDB follow Amazon Aurora's original high-level architecture from the 2010s, with a single primary node separating compute and storage. For now, Snowflake's PostgreSQL DBaaS uses the same core architecture as standard PostgreSQL because they built on Crunchy Bridge . Distributed PostgreSQL: All of the services I listed above are single-primary node architectures. That is, applications send writes to a primary node, which then sends those changes to secondary replicas. But in 2025, there were two announcements on new projects to create scale-out (i.e., horizontal partitioning) services for PostgreSQL. In June 2025, Supabase announced that it had hired Sugu , the Vitess co-creator and former PlanetScale co-founder/CTO, to lead the Multigres project to create sharding middleware for PostgreSQL, similar to how Vitess shards MySQL. Sugu left PlanetScale in 2023 and had to lie back in the cut for two years. He is now likely clear of any legal issues and can make things happen at Supabase. You know it is a big deal when a database engineer joins a company, and the announcement focuses more on the person than the system. The co-founder/CTO of SingleStore joined Microsoft in 2024 to lead HorizonDB , but Microsoft (incorrectly) did not make a big deal about it. Sugu joining Supabase is like Ol' Dirty Bastard (RIP) getting out on parole after two years and then announcing a new record deal on the first day of his release. One month after the Multigres news dropped, PlanetScale announced its own Vitess-for-PostgreSQL project, Neki . PlanetScale launched its initial PostgreSQL DBaaS in March 2025, but the core architecture is single-node stock PostgreSQL with pgBouncer . Update 2026-01-05: I was reminded via private email that PgDog is also another open-source middleware system that seeks to support horizontal sharding in PostgreSQL. I had mentally compartmentalized PgDog in the same category as a connection pooling proxy ( PgBouncer ), but it is actually a competitor to Multigres and Neki. Commercial Landscape: With Microsoft's introduction of HorizonDB in 2025, all major cloud vendors now have serious projects for their own PostgreSQL offerings. Amazon has offered Aurora PostgreSQL since 2017. Google put out AlloyDB in 2022. ServiceNow launched its RaptorDB service in 2024 , based on its 2021 acquisition of Swarm64. Even the old flip-phone IBM has had its cloud version of PostgreSQL since 2018. Oracle released its PostgreSQL service in 2023 , though there is a rumor that its in-house PostgreSQL team was collateral damage in its MySQL OCI layoffs in September 2025. There are still a few independent (ISV) PostgreSQL DBaaS companies. Supabase is likely the largest of these by the number of instances. Others include YugabyteDB , TigerData (née TimeScale), PlanetScale , Xata , PgEdge , and Nile . Xata built its original architecture on Amazon Aurora , but this year, it announced it is switching to its own infrastructure . ParadeDB has yet to announce its hosted service. Tembo dropped its hosted PostgreSQL offering in 2025 to pivot to a coding agent that can do some database tuning. Hydra and PostgresML went bust in 2025 (see Deaths section), so they're out of the game. Other systems provide a Postgres-compatible front-end, but the back-end systems are not derived from PostgreSQL (e.g., CockroachDB , CedarDB , Google Spanner ). There are also hosting companies that offer PostgreSQL DBaaS alongside other systems, such as Aiven and Tessel . Andy's Take: It is not clear who the next major buyer will be after Databricks and Snowflake bought PostgreSQL companies. Again, every major tech company already has a Postgres offering. EnterpriseDB is the oldest PostgreSQL ISV, but missed out on the two most significant PostgreSQL acquisitions in the last five years. But they can ride Bain Capital's jock for a while, or hope that HPE buys them even though that partnership is from eight years ago. The PostgreSQL M&A playfield is reminiscent of OLAP acquisitions in the late 2000s, when Vertica was the last one waiting at the bus stop after AsterData , Greenplum , and DATAllegro were acquired. The development of the two three competing distributed PostgreSQL projects ( Multigres , Neki , PgDog ) is welcome news. These projects are not the first time somebody has attempted this: Greenplum , ParAccel , and Citus have been around for two decades for OLAP workloads. Citus supports OLTP workloads, but they started in 2010 focused on analytics . For OLTP, 15 years ago, the NTT RiTaDB project joined forces with GridSQL to create Postgres-XC . Developers from Postgres-XC founded StormDB , which Translattice later acquired in 2013. Postgres-X2 was an attempt to modernize XC, but the developers abandoned that effort. Translattice open-sourced StormDB as Postgres-XL , but the project has been dormant since 2018. YugabyteDB came out in 2016 and is probably the most widely deployed sharded PostgreSQL system (and remains open-source !), but it is a hard fork, so it is only compatible with PostgreSQL v15 . Amazon announced its own sharded PostgreSQL ( Aurora Limitless ) in 2024, but it is closed source. I know Microsoft bought Citus in 2019 but it is hard to keep track of what they were doing before HorizonDB because of their confusing product names. Citus was rebranded as Azure Database for PostgreSQL Hyperscale in 2019 and was then renamed to Azure Cosmos DB for PostgreSQL in 2022. But then there is Azure Database for PostgreSQL with Elastic Clusters that also uses Citus, but it is not the same as the Citus-powered Azure Cosmos DB for PostgreSQL. Microsoft discontinued Azure PostgreSQL Single Server in 2023, but kept Azure PostgreSQL Flexible Server. That is a lot of Azure this and Azure that. It is sort of like how Amazon could not resist adding "Aurora" to DSQL's name. Either way, at least Microsoft was smart enough to keep the name for their new system to just "Azure HorizonDB" (for now). The PlanetScale squad has no love for the other side and is known to throw hands at Neon and Timescale . Database companies popping off at each other is nothing new (see Yugabyte vs. CockroachDB or Databricks vs. Snowflake ). I suspect we will see more of this in the future as the PostgreSQL wars heat up. I suggest that these smaller companies call out the big cloud vendors and keep each other's name out of their mouths . MCP For Every Database! If 2023 was the year every DBMS added a vector index , then 2025 was the year that every DBMS added support for Anthropic's Model Context Protoc
