---
id: 596
url: https://skilldrick.github.io/easy6502/
title: Easy 6502 by skilldrick
domain: skilldrick.github.io
source_date: '2025-02-07'
tags:
- tutorial
- compilers
- javascript
summary: '"Easy 6502" is a beginner-friendly guide to learning 6502 assembly language,
  the processor that powered iconic computers like the Commodore 64, Apple II, and
  Nintendo Entertainment System. The author argues that studying 6502 is valuable
  for understanding how computers work at the lowest readable level of abstraction,
  and chose 6502 specifically because it was designed to be human-readable unlike
  modern assembly languages. The guide includes an interactive JavaScript simulator
  that allows readers to write, assemble, and debug 6502 code while learning fundamental
  concepts like registers, memory locations, instructions, and processor flags.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Easy 6502 by skilldrick

Introduction In this tiny ebook I’m going to show you how to get started writing 6502 assembly language. The 6502 processor was massive in the seventies and eighties, powering famous computers like the BBC Micro , Atari 2600 , Commodore 64 , Apple II , and the Nintendo Entertainment System . Bender in Futurama has a 6502 processor for a brain . Even the Terminator was programmed in 6502 . So, why would you want to learn 6502? It’s a dead language isn’t it? Well, so’s Latin. And they still teach that. Q.E.D. (Actually, I’ve been reliably informed that 6502 processors are still being produced by Western Design Center and sold to hobbyists , so clearly 6502 isn’t a dead language! Who knew?) Seriously though, I think it’s valuable to have an understanding of assembly language. Assembly language is the lowest level of abstraction in computers - the point at which the code is still readable. Assembly language translates directly to the bytes that are executed by your computer’s processor. If you understand how it works, you’ve basically become a computer magician . Then why 6502? Why not a useful assembly language, like x86 ? Well, I don’t think learning x86 is useful. I don’t think you’ll ever have to write assembly language in your day job - this is purely an academic exercise, something to expand your mind and your thinking. 6502 was originally written in a different age, a time when the majority of developers were writing assembly directly, rather than in these new-fangled high-level programming languages. So, it was designed to be written by humans. More modern assembly languages are meant to written by compilers, so let’s leave it to them. Plus, 6502 is fun . Nobody ever called x86 fun . Our first program So, let’s dive in! That thing below is a little JavaScript 6502 assembler and simulator that I adapted for this book. Click Assemble then Run to assemble and run the snippet of assembly language. LDA #$01 STA $0200 LDA #$05 STA $0201 LDA #$08 STA $0202 Debugger Monitor Start: $ Length: $ Notes: Memory location $fe contains a new random byte on every instruction. Memory location $ff contains the ascii code of the last key pressed. Memory locations $200 to $5ff map to the screen pixels. Different values will draw different colour pixels. The colours are: $0: Black $1: White $2: Red $3: Cyan $4: Purple $5: Green $6: Blue $7: Yellow $8: Orange $9: Brown $a: Light red $b: Dark grey $c: Grey $d: Light green $e: Light blue $f: Light grey Hopefully the black area on the right now has three coloured “pixels” at the top left. (If this doesn’t work, you’ll probably need to upgrade your browser to something more modern, like Chrome or Firefox.) So, what’s this program actually doing? Let’s step through it with the debugger. Hit Reset , then check the Debugger checkbox to start the debugger. Click Step once. If you were watching carefully, you’ll have noticed that A= changed from $00 to $01 , and PC= changed from $0600 to $0602 . Any numbers prefixed with $ in 6502 assembly language (and by extension, in this book) are in hexadecimal (hex) format. If you’re not familiar with hex numbers, I recommend you read the Wikipedia article . Anything prefixed with # is a literal number value. Any other number refers to a memory location. Equipped with that knowledge, you should be able to see that the instruction LDA #$01 loads the hex value $01 into register A . I’ll go into more detail on registers in the next section. Press Step again to execute the second instruction. The top-left pixel of the simulator display should now be white. This simulator uses the memory locations $0200 to $05ff to draw pixels on its display. The values $00 to $0f represent 16 different colours ( $00 is black and $01 is white), so storing the value $01 at memory location $0200 draws a white pixel at the top left corner. This is simpler than how an actual computer would output video, but it’ll do for now. So, the instruction STA $0200 stores the value of the A register to memory location $0200 . Click Step four more times to execute the rest of the instructions, keeping an eye on the A register as it changes. Exercises Try changing the colour of the three pixels. Change one of the pixels to draw at the bottom-right corner (memory location $05ff ). Add more instructions to draw extra pixels. Registers and flags We’ve already had a little look at the processor status section (the bit with A , PC etc.), but what does it all mean? The first line shows the A , X and Y registers ( A is often called the “accumulator”). Each register holds a single byte. Most operations work on the contents of these registers. SP is the stack pointer. I won’t get into the stack yet, but basically this register is decremented every time a byte is pushed onto the stack, and incremented when a byte is popped off the stack. PC is the program counter - it’s how the processor knows at what point in the program it currently is. It’s like the current line number of an executing script. In the JavaScript simulator the code is assembled starting at memory location $0600 , so PC always starts there. The last section shows the processor flags. Each flag is one bit, so all seven flags live in a single byte. The flags are set by the processor to give information about the previous instruction. More on that later. Read more about the registers and flags here . Instructions Instructions in assembly language are like a small set of predefined functions. All instructions take zero or one arguments. Here’s some annotated source code to introduce a few different instructions: LDA #$c0 ;Load the hex value $c0 into the A register TAX ;Transfer the value in the A register to X INX ;Increment the value in the X register ADC #$c4 ;Add the hex value $c4 to the A register BRK ;Break - we're done Debugger Monitor Start: $ Length: $ Notes: Memory location $fe contains a new random byte on every instruction. Memory location $ff contains the ascii code of the last key pressed. Memory locations $200 to $5ff map to the screen pixels. Different values will draw different colour pixels. The colours are: $0: Black $1: White $2: Red $3: Cyan $4: Purple $5: Green $6: Blue $7: Yellow $8: Orange $9: Brown $a: Light red $b: Dark grey $c: Grey $d: Light green $e: Light blue $f: Light grey Assemble the code, then turn on the debugger and step through the code, watching the A and X registers. Something slightly odd happens on the line ADC #$c4 . You might expect that adding $c4 to $c0 would give $184 , but this processor gives the result as $84 . What’s up with that? The problem is, $184 is too big to fit in a single byte (the max is $FF ), and the registers can only hold a single byte. It’s OK though; the processor isn’t actually dumb. If you were looking carefully enough, you’ll have noticed that the carry flag was set to 1 after this operation. So that’s how you know. In the simulator below type (don’t paste) the following code: LDA #$80 STA $01 ADC $01 Debugger Monitor Start: $ Length: $ Notes: Memory location $fe contains a new random byte on every instruction. Memory location $ff contains the ascii code of the last key pressed. Memory locations $200 to $5ff map to the screen pixels. Different values will draw different colour pixels. The colours are: $0: Black $1: White $2: Red $3: Cyan $4: Purple $5: Green $6: Blue $7: Yellow $8: Orange $9: Brown $a: Light red $b: Dark grey $c: Grey $d: Light green $e: Light blue $f: Light grey An important thing to notice here is the distinction between ADC #$01 and ADC $01 . The first one adds the value $01 to the A register, but the second adds the value stored at memory location $01 to the A register. Assemble, check the Monitor checkbox, then step through these three instructions. The monitor shows a section of memory, and can be helpful to visualise the execution of programs. STA $01 stores the value of the A register at memory location $01 , and ADC $01 adds the value stored at the memory location $01 to the A register. $80 + $80 should equal $100 , but because this is bigger than a byte, the A register is set to $00 and the carry flag is set. As well as this though, the zero flag is set. The zero flag is set by all instructions where the result is zero. A full list of the 6502 instruction set is available here and here (I usually refer to both pages as they have their strengths and weaknesses). These pages detail the arguments to each instruction, which registers they use, and which flags they set. They are your bible. Exercises You’ve seen TAX . You can probably guess what TAY , TXA and TYA do, but write some code to test your assumptions. Rewrite the first example in this section to use the Y register instead of the X register. The opposite of ADC is SBC (subtract with carry). Write a program that uses this instruction. Branching So far we’re only able to write basic programs without any branching logic. Let’s change that. 6502 assembly language has a bunch of branching instructions, all of which branch based on whether certain flags are set or not. In this example we’ll be looking at BNE : “Branch on not equal”. LDX #$08 decrement: DEX STX $0200 CPX #$03 BNE decrement STX $0201 BRK Debugger Monitor Start: $ Length: $ Notes: Memory location $fe contains a new random byte on every instruction. Memory location $ff contains the ascii code of the last key pressed. Memory locations $200 to $5ff map to the screen pixels. Different values will draw different colour pixels. The colours are: $0: Black $1: White $2: Red $3: Cyan $4: Purple $5: Green $6: Blue $7: Yellow $8: Orange $9: Brown $a: Light red $b: Dark grey $c: Grey $d: Light green $e: Light blue $f: Light grey First we load the value $08 into the X register. The next line is a label. Labels just mark certain points in a program so we can return to them later. After the label we decrement X , store it to $0200 (the top-left pixel), and then compare it to the value $03 . CPX compares the value in the X register with anoth
