---
id: 938
url: https://ayosec.github.io/ffmpeg-drawvg/
title: FFmpeg - drawvg - FFmpeg - drawvg
domain: ayosec.github.io
source_date: '2026-03-20'
tags:
- cli-tool
- tutorial
- web-dev
summary: The drawvg filter for FFmpeg (available since version 8.1) allows users to
  render vector graphics on top of video frames using a custom scripting language
  called VGS (Vector Graphics Script). VGS is designed to be concise and easy to use,
  with syntax inspired by PostScript, SVG, and other languages, and supports dynamic
  graphics through FFmpeg expressions for computing coordinates, accessing frame metadata,
  and reading pixel colors. The page provides practical examples demonstrating how
  to use drawvg for creating progress indicators, transitions, pixelization effects,
  and wave distortions by combining it with other FFmpeg filters.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# FFmpeg - drawvg - FFmpeg - drawvg

drawvg filter for FFmpeg drawvg is a FFmpeg filter , available since 8.1 , to render vector graphics on top of video frames. The render is done by executing a script written in its own language, called VGS ( Vector Graphics Script ). The script consists of a series of commands to describe 2D graphics, which are rasterized using the Cairo library. VGS is not intended to be used as a general-purpose language. Since its scope is limited, it prioritizes being concise and easy to use. The syntax is heavily inspired by languages like Magick Vector Graphics , or SVG's <path> . Some features of the syntax (like using whitespaces to separate arguments) are also present in languages like TCL or shell scripts . Many command names are taken from PostScript . VGS is fully documented in the language reference . Scripts can use FFmpeg expressions to describe graphics dynamically, so they can compute coordinates based on frame dimensions, frame metadata, generate random values, read pixel colors, etc. Examples This is a short list of examples to showcase how to integrate the drawvg filter with other filters in FFmpeg. The Playground has a gallery with more examples, focused on the capabilities of the VGS language. Progress Indicator The variable t can be used to compute one of the angles of the arcn command. Then, we can create an animation like this: The script can be rendered directly on top of a video: Output progress.vgs setvar T 3 setvar R (h / 6) translate (w - R - 5) (R + 5) moveto 0 0 arcn 0 0 R (3 * PI / 2 - (PI * 2 * mod(t - ts, T) / T)) (-PI / 2) setcolor red@0.6 fill Shell ffmpeg \ -an \ -ss 12 -t 3 -i bigbuckbunny.mov \ -vf 'crop=iw-1, drawvg=file=progress.vgs, format=yuv420p' \ -c:v libvpx-vp9 \ output.webm This example uses clips from the Big Buck Bunny movie , available under CC BY 3.0 license. Using Frame Metadata The cropdetect filter calculates the necessary cropping parameters to remove black borders around a video. These parameters are added to each frame as metadata . drawvg can access the output of cropdetect with the getmetadata command. The following example draws a red rectangle to represent the calculated area by cropdetect . Output cropdetect.vgs getmetadata cdx lavfi.cropdetect.x getmetadata cdy lavfi.cropdetect.y getmetadata cdw lavfi.cropdetect.w getmetadata cdh lavfi.cropdetect.h rect cdx cdy cdw cdh setcolor red@0.5 setlinewidth 10 stroke Shell ffmpeg \ -an \ -i highway.mp4 \ -vf 'cropdetect, drawvg=file=cropdetect.vgs, format=yuv420p' \ -c:v libvpx-vp9 \ output.webm This example uses the video Night Drive on Highway with Passing Cars , free to use by the pexels license . CircleCrop Transition This example creates a transition similar to the circlecrop transition of the xfade filter, but the circle can be positioned anywhere, not only at the center of the frame. Output circlecrop.vgs rect 0 0 w h setvar d (sin(PI / 2 * (t - ts))) circle (4 * w / 5) (3 * h / 5) (max(w, h) * (1 - d)) eofill circlecrop.filter crop = iw-1 , drawvg = file=circlecrop.vgs : enable= 'gt(t,0.8)' , format = yuv420p Shell ffmpeg \ -an \ -ss 14 -t 4.2 -i bigbuckbunny.mov \ -/vf circlecrop.filter \ -c:v libvpx-vp9 \ output.webm This example uses clips from the Big Buck Bunny movie , available under CC BY 3.0 license. Custom Transitions Another way to create custom transitions is to use the alphamerge and overlay filters, with a mask rendered with a drawvg script. This is the output of the drawvg script: alphamerge can set these frames as the alpha channel of a video. Then, use overlay to put the video with the mask on top of another one. Output transition.vgs setvar BARS 7 setvar DURATION 2 setvar IB (1 / BARS) setvar P ((t - ts) / DURATION) scalexy w h translate 0 0.5 repeat BARS { setvar bar (BARS * (P - i / BARS)) if (lt(bar, 0)) { break } rect 0 (if(mod(i, 2), 0.5 - bar, -0.5)) IB bar translate IB 0 } fill transition.filter [0] split [mask-bg] [mask-delay] ; [mask-bg] drawvg = file=transition.vgs [bars] ; [mask-delay] [bars] concat [mask] ; [1] [mask] alphamerge [a] ; [2] [a] overlay = enable= 'lt(t,4)' , crop = iw-1 , format = yuv420p Shell ffmpeg \ -f lavfi -i 'color=white:s=853x480:r=24:d=2' \ -ss 16 -t 4 -i bigbuckbunny.mov \ -ss 7:51 -t 6 -i bigbuckbunny.mov \ -/filter_complex transition.filter \ -an \ -c:v libvpx-vp9 \ output.webm This example uses clips from the Big Buck Bunny movie , available under CC BY 3.0 license. Reading Colors The function p(x, y) returns the color of a pixel at the given coordinates. It can be used to apply pixelization to a frame, similar to the pixelize filter. Instead of rectangles, the shape used for pixelization are rhombuses, and each one has a thin border to highlight its outline. The output below shows the original frame on the left, and the frame updated by the drawvg script on the right: Output pixelate.vgs setvar SIZE 20 setvar MID (SIZE / 2) repeat (h / SIZE + 1) { save if (mod(i, 2)) { translate SIZE 0 } setvar COL i repeat (w / SIZE + 1) { setvar px (p(0, 0)) if (isnan(px)) { setvar px (p(-MID, 0)) } if (isnan(px)) { setvar px (p(0, -MID)) } if (not(isnan(px))) { setcolor px } moveto (-SIZE) 0 lineto 0 (-SIZE) , SIZE 0 , 0 SIZE closepath preserve fill setcolor black@0.1 stroke translate (SIZE * 2) 0 } restore translate 0 SIZE } pixelate.filter [0] scale = iw/1.5 : -2 , split [a] [b] ; [a] pixelize , drawvg = file=pixelate.vgs , pad = iw*2+30 : ih+20 : iw+20 : ih+10 [a0] ; [a0] [b] overlay = 10 : 10 , format = yuv420p Shell ffmpeg \ -an \ -ss 1 -t 18 -i bigbuckbunny.mov \ -/filter_complex pixelate.filter \ -c:v libvpx-vp9 \ output.webm This example uses clips from the Big Buck Bunny movie , available under CC BY 3.0 license. Waves Effect drawvg can be combined with the displace filter to create a wave effect: First, a drawvg script renders horizontal rectangles with different shades of gray. Then, boxblur is used to soften the transition between rectangles. This image is used as the xmap input for displace . The output below contains the intermediate images. Output waves.vgs scalexy w (h / 20) translate 0 (sin(4 * t)) repeat 20 { setvar T (mod((t - ts) + randomg(1), 0.75) / 0.75) setvar T (2 * abs(T - floor(T + 0.5))) setvar a (T / 16 + 0.45) setrgba a a a 1 rect 0 i 1 1 fill } waves.filter [0] crop = iw-1, split [source0] [source1] ; [source0] drawvg = rect 0 0 w h setcolor gray fill , loop = -1 : 1 : 0 , split [gray0] [gray1] ; [gray0] drawvg = file=waves.vgs , split [xmap_src0] [xmap_src1] ; [xmap_src0] boxblur = h/40 , split [xmap0] [xmap1] ; [source1] [xmap1] [gray1] displace = mirror , pad = iw*2+30 : ih*2+30 : 10:10 [pad0] ; [pad0] [xmap_src1] overlay = 10 : h+20 [pad1] ; [pad1] [source1] overlay = w+20 : 10 : shortest=1 [pad2] ; [pad2] [xmap0] overlay = w+20 : h+20 : shortest=1 , drawtext = text= 'drawvg' : y=h-20 : x=20 : y_align=baseline : fontsize=32 : fontcolor=white , drawtext = text= 'boxblur' : y=h-20 : x=w/2+20 : y_align=baseline : fontsize=32 : fontcolor=white , drawtext = text= 'Source' : y=h/2-20 : x=w/2+20 : y_align=baseline : fontsize=32 : fontcolor=white , format = yuv420p Shell ffmpeg \ -an \ -ss 5 -t 10 -i bigbuckbunny.mov \ -/filter_complex waves.filter \ -c:v libvpx-vp9 \ output.webm This example uses clips from the Big Buck Bunny movie , available under CC BY 3.0 license.
