---
id: 218
url: https://www.flightcontrol.dev/
title: Flightcontrol – The AWS experience that didn&#x27;t seem possible
domain: www.flightcontrol.dev
source_date: '2025-10-06'
tags:
- devops
- web-dev
- cli-tool
summary: Flightcontrol is a Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) that simplifies AWS deployment
  by automating infrastructure management, CI/CD pipelines, and DevOps tasks without
  requiring specialized expertise. It allows developers to deploy servers, databases,
  APIs, and other services directly to their AWS account through an intuitive dashboard
  and git-based workflows, eliminating the need to hire expensive DevOps engineers
  while maintaining full control and AWS's scalability benefits. The platform includes
  features like preview environments, 24/7 support with 6-minute response times, and
  supports companies managing over $3 million in AWS resources.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Flightcontrol – The AWS experience that didn&#x27;t seem possible

Build your dreams on AWS, effortlessly Flightcontrol is a PaaS that deploys to your AWS account Servers, Lambdas, workers, crons, static sites, databases & Redis We are your devops team with 24/7 emergency support Companies outgrowing other PaaS or homegrown AWS switch to Flightcontrol to regain reliability, security, and scalability at a reasonable cost Start free trial Get a demo Over $3 million of AWS resources under management The old way "Our AWS setup is consuming too much time & attention" Your team gets bogged down with complex Terraform scripts, manual configuration, and endless CI/CD pipelines. You could hire DevOps engineers, but they are expensive and it's hard to find really good ones. It will do the job, but now your developer productivity suffers as they are dependent on the infra team to make changes or spin up new services. The new way "Flightcontrol gives our team the power to manage bare metal AWS without needing to hire specific talent" Save thousands of dollars and months of time because Flightcontrol significantly reduces DevOps overhead. It empowers your developers ship like crazy without needing AWS or infrastructure expertise. Your developers gain full autonomy while benefiting from AWS's unmatched scalability, reliability, and flexibility. Simple, powerful deployments without worrying about low level AWS config We take the best AWS services , put together a best-in-class setup , and make them super easy to use . Connect your AWS account to Flightcontrol Connect your git repository to Flightcontrol Define your services (servers, APIs, databases, etc) Flightcontrol fully automates infrastructure provisioning, CI/CD, and deployments . All within your own AWS account where you retain full visibility and control Flightcontrol simplifies your deployments by providing a user-friendly dashboard designed specifically for developers , not DevOps engineers. Forget the frustration of navigating AWS’s overwhelming and fragmented console. With Flightcontrol, you see your entire infrastructure clearly in one intuitive interface, allowing you to manage deployments, services, and scaling with confidence. Deployments become as easy as a simple git push or webhook integration. Flightcontrol handles your CI/CD automation entirely, enabling your team to deploy confidently and quickly without maintaining complex Terraform or CDK scripts. You get the simplicity of platforms like Vercel or Heroku, paired with the raw power, near perfect reliability, and immense flexibility of AWS. Your developers can ship faster and stay focused on building great products. “Flightcontrol offers a nice balance between batteries-included and escape hatches that I haven't seen elsewhere. Keep up the good work and let us know if you need anything!” Matt Davis , Head of Technology | Spring Studios The Flightcontrol team allowed us to keep the seamless development experience of Vercel, but with the costs, control and flexibility of AWS. Not only their platform is great, the team went the extra mile to support us, no matter the day or time of day! Alfonso Gomez Jordana Manas , Founder | Crossmint We've been migrating our Rails app off of Heroku and onto AWS via Flightcontrol. The team is AWESOME and have built an excellent product. So good. ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐ Joel Hooks , CEO | Egghead Nothing else compares for balance between control, flexibility and simplicity. A perfect fit for us. For our multiple locale deployments, 3-5 million monthly page views, use case, the Flightcontrol team were incredibly helpful in getting us setup + ensuring we understood what we had. 10/10 Tim Booker , COO | Lineup Publishing Without FlightControl it would simply not have been possible for our company to begin the migration process to AWS. They simplify so much of the AWS experience which allows primarily frontend developers such as myself to focus more on code and less on infrastructure. Thomas Kovacs , Software Architect | Webgears Serve all your use-cases from a single platform CloudFront CDN S3 Lambda@Edget CloudFront CDN ECS Fargate or EC2 New ECS Fargate or EC2 ECS Fargate or EC2 ECS Fargate or EC2 ECS Fargate or EC2 Lambda RDS ElastiCache S3 Significantly reduce your DevOps overhead Flightcontrol becomes your devops team. We guarantee support for everything managed through Flightcontro l. You don't have to worry about anything that's amiss in AWS — let us know and we'll fix it ASAP (but rest assured, this almost never happens!). Get 24/7 emergency support on our Business plan for ultimate peace of mind. Need some extra devops support beyond the Flightcontrol platform? We offer DevOps Support Add-ons to supplement your team . This is ideal for teams that need extra infrastructure help but don't need a full time devops engineer. I've been using Flightcontrol for a long time, and I've never had a product that's given me better support. They have been so awesome and easy to work with. Being able to deploy things using AWS credits made a lot of things possible for me what weren't on other platforms. Leo Guinan , Founder | Multiple We're using Flightcontrol at Productlane and love it. We moved from Fly.io to Railway to Flightcontrol and finally found the right platform for us that works reliably and didn't have random downtime. Raphael Fleckenstein , CEO | Productlane We're using Flightcontrol at Tono Health and it has completely solved our lack of devops expertise. With the new CI build runners, it also cut our build time in HALF compared to GitHub Actions. We're so happy with Flightcontrol Ethan Cohen , CTO | Tono Health Two large SaaS businesses I’m involved in have all deployed on Flightcontrol for years, and have had no issues. Infra devops cut down to zero! Deploying and scaling infra has been a dream. I can’t imagine why anyone in their sane mind not try Flightcontrol Andreas Asprou , CTO | Flick & Dweet Ephemeral preview environments The fastest moving engineering teams use preview environments to view changes before committing them. Flightcontrol can automatically spin up temporary infrastructure for each pull request and then clean it up when the pull request is merged. Preview environments mean no more conflicts on staging , no more delays, and significantly fewer bugs in production. Enable all stakeholders to see and test changes before merging code. Each preview environment is cost-optimized , intelligently sharing resources such as load balancers and RDS instances, ensuring you maintain control over spending. Database seeding per environment means realistic testing scenarios, catching issues before they go live. Your team will experience faster releases, fewer bugs, and smoother collaboration. World class support with 6 minute median response time Imagine never worrying about infrastructure issues again. Flightcontrol becomes your DevOps team, providing exceptional, responsive support. With guaranteed smooth operations for everything managed by Flightcontrol, you can rest easy knowing your infrastructure is covered by experts around the clock. With a median first response time of 6 minutes, our dedicated support team is accessible via email and Slack, ensuring rapid resolution whenever you need it. Need some extra DevOps help? Don’t hire full time! Our DevOps support add-on gives you expert guidance tailored specifically to your unique requirements, removing the need to hire a full-time DevOps engineer. “It's saving so much time and headache for me and my team. Keep up the good work, we love your product!” Johan , CTO | xNomad "Flightcontrol has been a dream, and their level of support has been off the charts. I switched from Lambda to get GPU support and got magnitudes better performance at a fraction of the cost for my AI Video company." Daniel , Founder | QuickVid “Flightcontrol is excellent devops tooling that would take time and dedicated devops engineers to build at many companies. We're very glad we found Flightcontrol. It's an amazing value for us.” Dylan , CTO & Co-founder | Boardwalk Marketing Visual Config? Code config? Both! Infrastructure-as-code designed for moving fast Deploy close to your users Choose today from 28 AWS regions. Multi-region deploys in early access. Observability Stay on top of things with our metrics and alerts, or add sidecars like Datadog. Nixpacks Build any language or framework without writing a Dockerfile. The modern successor to Heroku buildpacks. Stale while revalidate + Next.js & Svelte ISR Blazing fast speed with CloudFront's stale-while-revalidate support AWS cost transparency Understand exactly where the dollars are going by project, environment, and service. Preview environments, fullstack Deploy your all your services for every pull request to a cost optimized environment. Bring your monoliths and your microservices Your architecture will work with us, no matter how big or small. Your domain, with https Connect your domain with a couple DNS records. No messing with SSL certificates. Peak edge performance World-class performance with CloudFront, Stale-While-Revalidate, and edge-based Next.js ISR. Even multi-region. Monorepos, with watch paths Put all your stuff in one place, that's fine with us. And only deploy changed files with watch paths. Maintenance mode Block traffic to your app while you're doing something important (we assume). API & deploy hooks Trigger deploys from CI. More thorough API is coming, we promise. Notifications Get alerted in Slack or email when things go south. Or when they go north. Rollback It happens to the best of us, so we've got your back when the inevitable happens. Private VPC networking Each environment is deployed to a new or existing VPC. Get private services and private databases. Deploy every language globally Every language and framework works beautifully in the Flightcontrol universe. Welcome home. 1. Connect your AWS and Git Repo with 1-click Everything is deployed to your AWS account where you have full ownership and control. Without the frustrating limitations of
