---
id: 920
url: https://github.com/gcv/julia-snail
title: 'GitHub - gcv/julia-snail: An Emacs development environment for Julia · GitHub'
domain: github.com
source_date: '2026-03-11'
tags:
- github-repo
- common-lisp
- clojure
- cli-tool
summary: Julia Snail is an Emacs development environment for Julia programming that
  provides REPL-driven development similar to Common Lisp's SLIME and Clojure's CIDER.
  It features high-performance terminal emulation using libvterm or Eat, remote REPL
  support via SSH, multimedia/plotting capabilities, code cross-referencing, and completion
  integration with Emacs' built-in systems. The package requires Emacs 26.2+ (or 28.1+
  for Eat), Julia 1.6.0+, and Unix-like systems or Windows with WSL, and can be installed
  via MELPA with straightforward configuration using use-package.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# GitHub - gcv/julia-snail: An Emacs development environment for Julia · GitHub

Julia Snail Snail is a development environment and REPL interaction package for Julia in the spirit of Common Lisp’s SLIME and Clojure’s CIDER . It enables convenient and dynamic REPL-driven development. Snail works on platforms which support libvterm or Eat , which currently means Unix-like systems. It should also work on Windows using WSL . Refer to the changelog for release notes. Features Demo Installation vterm Eat Snail Other considerations Configuration use-package setup Manual setup display-buffer-alist notes Other customizations Usage Basics Multiple Julia versions Multiple REPLs Remote REPLs julia-snail-executable and the remote shell path Remote environment setup Errors mentioning No file notification program found Docker container REPLs Extra Julia command-line arguments Module-nested include s Documentation lookup Multimedia and plotting code-cells integration (notebook mode) Extensions REPL history Formatter Ob-Julia Debug Future improvements Features REPL display: Snail uses advanced terminal emulators ( libvterm with Emacs bindings or Eat ) to display Julia’s native REPL. As a result, the REPL has good performance and far fewer display glitches than attempting to run the REPL in an Emacs-native term.el buffer. REPL interaction: Snail provides a bridge between Julia code and a Julia process running in a REPL. The bridge allows Emacs to interact with and introspect the Julia image. Among other things, this allows loading entire files and individual functions into running Julia processes. Remote REPLs: Julia sessions on remote machines work transparently with Snail using SSH and Emacs Tramp. Multimedia and plotting: Snail can display Julia graphics in graphical Emacs instances using packages like Plots and Gadfly . Cross-referencing: Snail is integrated with the built-in Emacs xref system. When a Snail session is active, it supports jumping to definitions of functions and macros loaded in the session. Completion: Snail is also integrated with the built-in Emacs completion-at-point facility. Provided it is configured with the company-capf backend, company-mode completion will also work (this should be the case by default). Parser: Snail uses CSTParser , a full-featured Julia parser, to infer the structure of source files and to enable features which require an understanding of code context, especially the module in which a particular piece of code lives. This enables awareness of the current module for completion and cross-referencing purposes. Demo screencast-2021-08-06.mp4 Installation Julia versions >1.6.0 should all work with Snail. Snail’s Julia-side dependencies will automatically be installed when it starts, and will stay out of your way using Julia’s LOAD_PATH mechanism . On the Emacs side, you must install one of the supported high-performance terminal emulators to use with the Julia REPL: either vterm or Eat . vterm Make sure you have Emacs 26.2 or later, compiled with module support ( --with-modules ). Check the value of module-file-suffix : it should be non-nil. (This is currently a default compile-time option Emacs distributed with Homebrew .) Install libvterm . It is available in Homebrew and Ubuntu 19.10 , and in source form on other systems. Install emacs-libvterm using your Emacs package manager. It is available from MELPA as vterm , so use something like (package-install 'vterm) or (use-package vterm :ensure t) . It is important to do this step separately from the julia-snail installation, as you may run into problems with the Emacs package manager and byte-compiler! Verify that vterm works by running M-x vterm to start a shell. It should display a nice terminal buffer. You may find it useful to customize and configure vterm . Eat Eat requires Emacs 28.1 or later. Install and configure it. The following use-package example should help: ( add-to-list 'package-archives '( " nongnu " . " https://elpa.nongnu.org/nongnu/ " ) t ) ( use-package eat :pin nongnu :custom (eat-kill-buffer-on-exit t ) :config ( delete [ ?\C -u] eat-semi-char-non-bound-keys) ; make C-u work in Eat terminals like in normal terminals ( delete [ ?\C -g] eat-semi-char-non-bound-keys) ; ditto for C-g (eat-update-semi-char-mode-map) ; ; XXX: Awkward workaround for the need to call eat-reload after changing Eat's keymaps, ; ; but reloading from :config section causes infinite recursion because :config wraps with-eval-after-load. ( defvar eat--prevent-use-package-config-recursion nil ) ( unless eat--prevent-use-package-config-recursion ( setq eat--prevent-use-package-config-recursion t ) (eat-reload)) ( makunbound 'eat--prevent-use-package-config-recursion ) ) Snail Install julia-snail using your Emacs package manager (see below for a sample use-package invocation). It is available on MELPA and MELPA Stable . Other considerations Optionally, install markdown-mode to improve documentation buffer display. Because Julia supports Unicode identifiers and uses them for mathematical symbols, it is also a good idea to double-check that your Emacs is cleanly set up to handle Unicode. The article Working with Coding Systems and Unicode in Emacs explains the settings (though Emacs 27 seems to do the right thing by default). Configuration use-package setup If you plan to use vterm , then make sure to install vterm first! (See the Installation section.) This (unfortunately) means that the order of use-package invocations below matters: ( use-package vterm :ensure t ) ; ; Now run `M-x vterm` and make sure it works! ( use-package julia-snail :ensure t :hook (julia-mode . julia-snail-mode)) To use Eat instead of vterm , set julia-snail-terminal-type to :eat : ( use-package julia-snail :ensure t :custom (julia-snail-terminal-type :eat ) :hook (julia-mode . julia-snail-mode)) Manual setup Install dependencies as noted in the Package-Requires line of julia-snail.el . Then make sure vterm works, as described in the Installation section. ( add-to-list 'load-path " /path/to/julia-snail " ) ( require 'julia-snail ) ( add-hook 'julia-mode-hook # 'julia-snail-mode ) Then configure key bindings in julia-snail-mode-map as desired. display-buffer-alist notes Window and buffer display behavior is one of the worst defaults Emacs ships with. Please refer to remarks on the subject written elsewhere . Some packages go to great lengths to provide clean custom window management (e.g., Magit), but Snail does not have the resources to implement such elaborate schemes. Snail uses the Emacs display-buffer system to pop up windows, and tries to do so in the most sane manner possible. Most information pop-ups (except the REPL) can be dismissed by pressing q , and this should restore the window configuration in most cases. With Emacs defaults, Snail should also reuse existing windows as much as possible, i.e., calling julia-snail from a source buffer will switch an already-visible REPL window, and calling julia-snail from a REPL window will switch back to a source buffer and reuse already-visible windows. However, display-buffer will (by default) split windows if the target buffer is not visible. To prevent splits altogether, try the following: (add-to-list 'display-buffer-alist '("\\*julia" (display-buffer-reuse-window display-buffer-same-window))) It is likely that most users will want the default REPL pop-up behavior to split the window vertically, but the default split-window-sensibly implementation only splits that way if split-height-threshold is smaller than the current window height. split-height-threshold defaults to 80 (lines), and relatively few windows will be that tall. Therefore, consider adding something like the following to your configuration: ( customize-set-variable 'split-height-threshold 15 ) Other customizations julia-snail-use-emoji-mode-lighter (default t ) — attempt to use a 🐌 emoji in the Emacs modeline lighter if the display supports it. Set to nil to use the ASCII string "Snail" instead (a :diminish override in use-package should also work). julia-snail-repl-display-eval-results (default nil ) — print the result of evaluating code sent from Emacs to the REPL. julia-snail-popup-display-eval-results (default :command ) — show the result of evaluating code sent from Emacs to the REPL in the source buffer. Set to nil to deactivate, to :command to have the popup disappear at the next command, or to :change for when the buffer contents change. When set to :change , the popup display is limited to a single line. julia-snail-imenu-style (default :module-tree ) — control Imenu integration, especially module detection handling. When set to :module-tree , the Imenu is a tree with modules as nodes and functions, macros, and types as the leaves. This works well with modern Imenu display commands like consult-imenu and helm-imenu , and allows the imenu-list package to show a nice tree. However, this may interfere with the simpler imenu Emacs built-in command as it forces hierarchical navigation to reach leaves. The :flat setting disables Imenu hierarchies and instead puts the full module path in the identifier. To disable Snail's Imenu integration completely and fall back to the julia-mode regexp-based default, set julia-snail-imenu-style to nil . Usage The following describes basic Snail functionality. Refer to the Snail project wiki for additional information, including a Tips and Tricks section. Basics Once Snail is properly installed, open a Julia source file. If julia-mode-hook has been correctly configured, julia-snail-mode should be enabled in the buffer (look for the Snail lighter in the modeline). Start a Julia REPL using M-x julia-snail or C-c C-z . This will load all the Julia-side supporting code Snail requires, and start a server. The server runs on a TCP port (10011 by default) on localhost. You will see JuliaSnail.start(<port>) execute on the REPL. NB: If the REPL does not start successfully, this means the julia binary invocation failed. A common reason for this is failure to find the julia binary. Check that julia-snail-executa
