---
id: 871
url: https://github.com/ufo5260987423/scheme-langserver
title: 'GitHub - ufo5260987423/scheme-langserver: Scheme language server'
domain: github.com
source_date: '2026-02-25'
tags:
- github-repo
- scheme
- cli-tool
- compilers
summary: Scheme-langserver is a Language Server Protocol implementation for Scheme
  that provides code completion, definition lookup, and type inference through static
  code analysis, addressing limitations of existing tools like Geiser that rely on
  REPL-based approaches and fail to recognize local bindings in incomplete code. The
  project supports multiple Scheme standards (R6RS, R7RS, S7), integrates with the
  Akku package manager, and is available for use with VSCode, though the developer
  notes it contains bugs and is continuously being refined. Key features include document
  symbol navigation, hover information, cross-file indexing, and a custom type inference
  system, with the author actively seeking community contributions and funding to
  expand functionality with data flow analysis and additional language support.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# GitHub - ufo5260987423/scheme-langserver: Scheme language server

Scheme-langserver You may read my paper and cite like this WANG, Z. (2025, May 12). Scheme-langserver: Treat Scheme Code Editing as the First-Class Concern. The 18th European Lisp Symposium (ELS`25), Zurich. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15384882 Due to GitHub may block Chinese IP addresses, I have to copy this repository to here and here . I will continually update all repositories but I can't guarrentee. I now also collaborate with XmacsLabs , you may also find a fork here . default.mp4 Now, VSCode can use scheme-langserver! Please refere HERE . NOTE: There're many many bugs in scheme-langserver. I'm just fixing and appealing help from the community. Please be patient. NOTE: you can find the auto generated type information here . It's now mainly used for next-stage-development (maybe include AKKU) and debugging. Implementing support like autocomplete, goto definition, or documentation on hover is a significant effort for programming. However, comparing to other language like java, python, javascript and c, language server protocol implementation for lisp language are just made in a vacuum. Geiser , racket langserver and swish-lint etc., their works are all based on repl (Read-Eval-Print Loop) or keyword tokenizer instead of programming. For example, if a programmer was coding on an unaccomplished project, in which the codes were not fully executable, Geiser or any others would only complete top-level binding identifiers listed by environment-symbols procedure (for Chez ), or complete symbols instead of identifiers. Which means for local bindings and unaccomplished codes, though making effort for programming is supposed of the importance mostly, Geiser and its counterparts help nothing on recognizing identifier's valid scope. Familiar cases occur with goto definition and many other functionalities. A primary cause is, for scheme and other lisp dialects, their abundant data sets and flexible control structures raise program analysis a big challenge. Especially the macro, it seems like that scheme is mainly used for genius and meta/macro programming. But I say no. Scheme can make many interesting things if a better programming environment is provided. And now you may STARTUP HERE . This package is a language server protocol implementation helping scheme programming. It provides completion, definition and type inference. These functionalities are established on static code analysis with r6rs standard and some obvious rules for unaccomplished codes. This package itself and related libraries are published or going to be published with Akku , which is a package manager for Scheme. This package also has been tested with Chez Scheme versions 9.4 and 9.5. A detailed test on version 10.0.0 will be done after upgrading my laptop OS to a newer version. I do this open source work just in my spare time and I can contribute many splendid ideas to the community like embedding data flow analysis into scheme-langserver or many other things. And I'm continuously asking for much more donation or funding. You can donate with this patreon page or 爱发电 . Compilation , Installation & Configuration is HERE Debug or Issue Bugs, you may find THIS helpful. Recent Status I'll keep fixing bugs, profiling the code, and collecting information for my giant book on homemade type inference system. This will take me about 1 years. Further developments including a VScode plugin and data flow analysis. But actually, I'm now setting this open source work a part-time job, and I can not guarantee a schedule. Release 2.0.3 Fix wrongly pretty-print bugs, they mixtured with standard IO. Previous releases please refer to this file . Features Top-level and local identifiers binding completion. Goto definition. Compatible with package manager: Akku. File changes synchronizing and corresponding index changing. Hover. References and document highlight (document-scoped references). Document symbol. Catching *-syntax(define-syntax, let-syntax, etc.) based local identifier binding. Cross-platform parallel indexing. Self-made source code annotator to be compatible with .sps files. Peephole optimization for API requests with suspendable task. Type inference with a homemade DSL interpreter(I'm very proud of it!). And now it has been embedded into the auto-completion. As the following figure indicated, the "length-b" and "length-a" having "integer?" type are in the front of those recommended options because they can match the parameter type requiring from "<=". A test in can prove this result, just run scheme --script tests/protocol/apis/test-completion.sps and the log file scheme-langserver.log would contain results like this: By switching top environments, scheme-langserver supports R6RS/R7RS/ S7 . send-message 2023 11 21 11 26 41 967266866 { " jsonrpc " : " 2.0 " , " id " : " 3 " , " result " :[{ " label " : " length-a " },{ " label " : " length-b " },{ " label " : " lambda " },{ " label " : " latin-1-codec " },{ " label " : " lcm " },{ " label " : " least-fixnum " },{ " label " : " length " },{ " label " : " let " },{ " label " : " let* " },{ " label " : " let*-values " },{ " label " : " let-syntax " },{ " label " : " let-values " },{ " label " : " letrec " },{ " label " : " letrec* " },{ " label " : " letrec-syntax " },{ " label " : " lexical-violation? " },{ " label " : " list " },{ " label " : " list->string " },{ " label " : " list->vector " },{ " label " : " list-ref " },{ " label " : " list-sort " },{ " label " : " list-tail " },{ " label " : " list? " },{ " label " : " log " },{ " label " : " lookahead-char " },{ " label " : " lookahead-u8 " }]} Abstract interpreter for identifier catching among different file extensions like scm, ss, sps, sls and sld. Code diagnostic. Now only support to diagnoses library-not-found. TODOs Renaming. Fully compatible with r6rs standard . Step-by-step macro expander: well, I actually have implemented one and I wanted to make it a key step catching identifier binding in self-defined macros. Now, I find this catching is much harder than I thought, and the expander I don't know where it could work. Code eval. Add cross-language semantic supporting. Well, would java, c, python and many other languages can be supported with an AST transformer? Extract expression/statements into a procedure. TODO:Contributing Test Almost all key procedures and APIs are tested. My work is just so rough but useful, maybe you would like to find what I've done in tests directory or just run following command in {scheme-langserver-root-directory} bash test.sh NOTE It's hard to do test with threaded environment. So, current tests focus on single thread. Use Scheme-langserver for Other Purpose Script-Fu in GIMP Script-Fu is based on an interpreted language called Scheme, and works by using functions that interact with GIMP's internal functions. Taking this page 's script as an example, you can apply scheme-langserver with script file with "SCM" extension. Others Well, I'm also interested in OMN (Opusmodus Notation) and AutoLisp. But I still have many things to do. Code Count find . -name " *.sls " ! -path " ./.akku/* " | xargs wc -l Detailed Document Scheme-langserver: Treat Scheme Code Editing as the First-Class Concern . Catching identifier bindings Synchronizing Type inference , 类型推断 (Deprecated, and I'm writing a Chinese book for it) API Analysis Deepwiki Scheme-langserver develop guide . Star History Contributors
