---
id: 137
url: https://github.com/felipenlunkes/run-ancient-unix
title: 'GitHub - felipenlunkes/run-ancient-unix: Easily run old versions of UNIX for
  PDP-11 on modern hardware'
domain: github.com
source_date: '2025-11-20'
tags:
- github-repo
- emulator
- cli-tool
- python
summary: This GitHub repository provides tools to run historical UNIX versions on
  modern hardware, including Version 1, 5, and 7 UNIX for PDP-11 systems (via simulator)
  and Version 7 UNIX ported to x86 architecture. To use it, users need to install
  required tools like SIMH, QEMU, and Python, then clone the repository and run the
  setup script to download and install the UNIX disk images before launching their
  chosen UNIX version through either a command-line or Python GUI interface.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# GitHub - felipenlunkes/run-ancient-unix: Easily run old versions of UNIX for PDP-11 on modern hardware

Run ancient UNIX on modern hardware The contents of this repository allow older versions of UNIX ( ancient UNIX ) to run easily on modern Unix-like systems (Linux, FreeBSD, macOS, among others). At this time, you can run the following versions of UNIX: UNIX versions for PDP-11 (run on a PDP-11 simulator): Version 1 UNIX ; Version 5 UNIX ; Version 7 UNIX ; 2.11BSD UNIX . UNIX versions for x86: Version 7 UNIX ported to x86 architecture by Robert Nordier (original port in 1999 and patches in 2006-2007). License, Credits and Copyright First of all, credits and acknowledgment for material available in this repository that is not my own (or has been modified by me based on previous work). The UNIX versions available in this repository have been released as open source under the Caldera license available in this repository. Please read the document carefully for concrete information about your rights and obligations when using the software. Note that various components within the system images may have been made available under other license conditions. Pay attention to these components. A clear example is version 2.11BSD UNIX, which features code covered by the Caldera license made available, in addition to code released under the BSD license . Source files available in the images show the license and due copyright. Check this data before reuse. The UNIX images available in this repository were obtained from the w11 project (which uses these images for other purposes). You can get them directly here , as well as more information about the project, images, licenses and other data. The scripts used to simulate the systems using SIMH for v5 and v7 UNIX were obtained from a w11 project repository, which can be accessed here . The original scripts are available under license GLP v3 or later. Modifications in these files were made by me, to fit the purpose of this repository. These modifications are restricted to the same license as the original script. In addition, the general script for configuring the execution environment of versions v5 and v7 was obtained from the project, authored by Walter F.J. Mueller . You can get the original script here . The original script are available under license GLP v3 or later. Modifications in these files were made by me, to fit the purpose of this repository. These modifications are restricted to the same license as the original script. The port of Version 7 UNIX to the x86 architecture was performed by Robert Nordier . These modifications are released under the simplified BSD license. For more information on all aspects of the distribution, read this file . All my contributions and modifications (except for material that requires redistribution under the same license, such as the running scripts) are available in this repository under the BSD-3-Clause license . Running UNIX Section 1 Requeriments You will need the following tools and utilities to run the available UNIX versions: First of all, you must have the PDP-11 Simulator (SIMH), qemu , GNU bash , Python , wget and git installed on your device. If you already have them installed, skip to section 2 . To install on Debian, Ubuntu, Pop!_OS and derivatives, use: sudo apt install simh qemu qemu-system-i386 git wget python3 python3-pip python3-tk To install on Fedora and derivatives, use: sudo dnf install simh qemu qemu-system-i386 git wget python3 python3-pip python3-tkinter To install on FreeBSD, use (for FreeBSD, installing GNU bash is also required. This shell is not normally installed in a default installation. Installation of GNU bash is not required on Linux systems, where bash is already installed by default): su root # <= Enter your password to login as root user pkg install -q -y simh bash qemu git wget python3 py39-pip ln -s /usr/local/bin/pip-3.9 /usr/local/bin/pip pip install --upgrade pip To install on NetBSD, use (for NetBSD, installing GNU bash is also required. This shell is not normally installed in a default installation. Installation of GNU bash is not required on Linux systems, where bash is already installed by default): su root # <= Enter your password to login as root user pkgin install simh bash qemu git wget python3 py39-pip ln -s /usr/local/bin/pip-3.9 /usr/local/bin/pip pip install --upgrade pip To install on OpenBSD, use (for OpenBSD, installing GNU bash is also required. This shell is not normally installed in a default installation. Installation of GNU bash is not required on Linux systems, where bash is already installed by default): su root # <= Enter your password to login as root user pkg_add simh bash qemu git wget python3 py39-pip ln -s /usr/local/bin/pip-3.9 /usr/local/bin/pip pip install --upgrade pip After installation, proceed to section 2 . Section 2 You must clone this repository to your computer. For that, use: git clone https://github.com/felipenlunkes/run-ancient-unix cd run-ancient-unix After cloning the repository with the configuration files, you must populate the directories of each UNIX version with their respective image files. For that, go to the next section . Section 3 Now, you have to run the available run.sh script. For that, use: chmod +x run.sh ./run.sh First, you have to run the script and select the option to install system images. You can also use the Python frontend to run the script. This is the easiest and simplest way to run script functions. To run this frontend and not rely on the command line, go to section 5 . To continue the steps using the terminal, go to section 4 . Section 4 You will see the following screen: You must select, from the list below, which edition/version of UNIX you want to start. The available options are: 1) v1 UNIX 2) v5 UNIX 3) v7 UNIX 4) 2.11BSD UNIX 5) v7 UNIX for x86 6) Clear temporary files 7) Install the disk images for UNIX Select a number and press <ENTER>: In this case, you should select option 7 , which will install the system images. After pressing 7, press ENTER to make your choice effective. Wait for the process of obtaining, extracting, configuring and installing the images. After the installation is complete, you must run run.sh again to start a UNIX version. When running the script, you will be asked to choose one of the available UNIX versions. After typing only the number relative to the choice, press ENTER to make your decision effective. Then wait for the desired version to run. Now, you need to know peculiarities in the execution of each version of the system. For this, go to section 6 . Section 5 You need to start running the Python frontend that will manage the configuration and running of UNIX on your computer. First, you must install the TKinter Python package on your computer. For that, use: pip install tk After that, you can press the RAU.py script with the right button of your mouse and select the option of Run as program or start the script from the terminal, using: python3 RAU.py WARNING! The frontend is currently only compatible with the GNOME graphical environment (Linux and BSD systems). You can manually replace the gnome-terminal calls with konsole or another desired terminal emulator. Feel free to submit a pull request with any improvements or changes to the frontend. After running the program, you will see the following screen: On first run, you must install the UNIX disk images locally on your computer. Prior to this operation, you will NOT be able to run UNIX. To do so, click on the Install UNIX system images button. After downloading and installing the disk images, you are able to run UNIX. To do so, select the desired UNIX version in the Running options section of the frontend screen. Go to the next section for more information about the specifics of running each version of UNIX available. Remember that when using the Python frontend, the command line selection screen, as shown in the next section, will not be displayed. However, the manual options and settings presented in the next section (after the selection screen, which will not appear) are still required to run each version of UNIX. Section 6 Select the desired UNIX version option below for details on how to start and operate the system. Each version of UNIX has different boot procedures. Pay attention to each particularity. Particularities for Version 1 UNIX Particularities for Version 1 UNIX After the start of execution after selecting v1 version, you will see a screen like below: You must select, from the list below, which edition/version of UNIX you want to start. The available options are: 1) v1 UNIX 2) v5 UNIX 3) v7 UNIX 4) 2.11BSD UNIX 5) v7 UNIX for x86 6) Clear temporary files 7) Install the disk images for UNIX Select a number and press <ENTER>: 1 PDP-11 simulator V3.8-1 Disabling CR Disabling XQ RF: buffering file in memory TC0: 16b format, buffering file in memory :login: Just type root , in lower case, and press ENTER. You will immediately be taken to the UNIX v1 shell. You must select, from the list below, which edition/version of UNIX you want to start. The available options are: 1) v1 UNIX 2) v5 UNIX 3) v7 UNIX 4) 2.11BSD UNIX 5) v7 UNIX for x86 6) Clear temporary files 7) Install the disk images for UNIX Select a number and press <ENTER>: 1 PDP-11 simulator V3.8-1 Disabling CR Disabling XQ RF: buffering file in memory TC0: 16b format, buffering file in memory :login: root root # ls bin dev etc tmp usr # To end the simulation, press CTRL-E followed by CTRL-C or by typing quit when the simh> prompt appears on the screen. Particularities for Version 5 UNIX Particularities for Version 5 UNIX After the start of execution after selecting v5 version, you will see a screen like below: You must select, from the list below, which edition/version of UNIX you want to start. The available options are: 1) v1 UNIX 2) v5 UNIX 3) v7 UNIX 4) 2.11BSD UNIX 5) v7 UNIX for x86 6) Clear temporary files 7) Install the disk images for UNIX Select a number and press <ENTER>: 2 PDP-11 simulator V3.8-1 Disabling XQ Logging to file "simh_dl0.log" Listening on p
