---
id: 533
url: https://github.com/suitenumerique/docs
title: 'GitHub - suitenumerique/docs: A collaborative note taking, wiki and documentation
  platform that scales. Built with Django and React.'
domain: github.com
source_date: '2025-03-16'
tags:
- github-repo
- python
- typescript
- web-dev
- devops
summary: '**Docs** is an open-source collaborative note-taking and documentation platform
  built with Django and React, designed as an alternative to Notion or Confluence.
  It features live collaborative editing, offline support, AI-powered writing tools,
  granular access control, and multiple export formats, with easy self-hosting options
  via Docker or Kubernetes. The project is a joint initiative of the French and German
  governments, licensed under MIT, and welcomes community contributions through its
  GitHub repository.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# GitHub - suitenumerique/docs: A collaborative note taking, wiki and documentation platform that scales. Built with Django and React.

Chat on Matrix - Documentation - Getting started - Reach out La Suite Docs : Collaborative Text Editing Docs, where your notes can become knowledge through live collaboration. Why use Docs ❓ Docs is a collaborative text editor designed to address common challenges in knowledge building and sharing. Write 😌 Get simple, accessible online editing for your team. 💅 Create clean documents with beautiful formatting options. 🖌️ Focus on your content using either the in-line editor, or the Markdown syntax . 🧱 Quickly design your page thanks to the many block types, accessible from the / slash commands, as well as keyboard shortcuts. 🔌 Write offline! Your edits will be synced once you're back online. ✨ Save time thanks to our AI actions, such as rephrasing, summarizing, fixing typos, translating, etc. You can even turn your selected text into a prompt! Work together 🤝 Enjoy live editing! See your team collaborate in real time. 🔒 Keep your information secure thanks to granular access control. Only share with the right people. 📑 Export your content in multiple formats ( .odt , .docx , .pdf ) with customizable templates. 📚 Turn your team's collaborative work into organized knowledge with Subpages. Self-host 🚀 Docs is easy to install on your own servers We use Kubernetes for our production instance but also support Docker Compose. The community contributed a couple other methods (Nix, YunoHost etc.) check out the docs to get detailed instructions and examples. 🌍 Known instances We hope to see many more, here is an incomplete list of public Docs instances. Feel free to make a PR to add ones that are not listed below🙏 Url Org Public docs.numerique.gouv.fr DINUM French public agents working for the central administration and the extended public sphere. ProConnect is required to login in or sign up docs.suite.anct.gouv.fr ANCT French public agents working for the territorial administration and the extended public sphere. ProConnect is required to login in or sign up notes.demo.opendesk.eu ZenDiS Demo instance of OpenDesk. Request access to get credentials notes.liiib.re lasuite.coop Free and open demo to all. Content and accounts are reset after one month docs.federated.nexus federated.nexus Public instance, but you have to sign up for a Federated Nexus account . docs.demo.mosacloud.eu mosa.cloud Demo instance of mosa.cloud, a dutch company providing services around La Suite apps. ⚠️ Advanced features For some advanced features (ex: Export as PDF) Docs relies on XL packages from BlockNote. These are licenced under GPL and are not MIT compatible. You can perfectly use Docs without these packages by setting the environment variable PUBLISH_AS_MIT to true. That way you'll build an image of the application without the features that are not MIT compatible. Read the environment variables documentation for more information. Getting started 🔧 Test it You can test Docs on your browser by visiting this demo document Run Docs locally ⚠️ The methods described below for running Docs locally is for testing purposes only . It is based on building Docs using Minio as an S3-compatible storage solution. Of course you can choose any S3-compatible storage solution. Prerequisite Make sure you have a recent version of Docker and Docker Compose installed on your laptop, then type: $ docker -v Docker version 20.10.2, build 2291f61 $ docker compose version Docker Compose version v2.32.4 ⚠️ You may need to run the following commands with sudo , but this can be avoided by adding your user to the local docker group. Project bootstrap The easiest way to start working on the project is to use GNU Make : $ make bootstrap FLUSH_ARGS='--no-input' This command builds the app-dev and frontend-dev containers, installs dependencies, performs database migrations and compiles translations. It's a good idea to use this command each time you are pulling code from the project repository to avoid dependency-related or migration-related issues. Your Docker services should now be up and running 🎉 You can access the project by going to http://localhost:3000 . You will be prompted to log in. The default credentials are: username: impress password: impress 📝 Note that if you need to run them afterwards, you can use the eponymous Make rule: $ make run ⚠️ For the frontend developer, it is often better to run the frontend in development mode locally. To do so, install the frontend dependencies with the following command: $ make frontend-development-install And run the frontend locally in development mode with the following command: $ make run-frontend-development To start all the services, except the frontend container, you can use the following command: $ make run-backend To execute frontend tests & linting only $ make frontend-test $ make frontend-lint Adding content You can create a basic demo site by running this command: $ make demo Finally, you can check all available Make rules using this command: $ make help Django admin You can access the Django admin site at: http://localhost:8071/admin . You first need to create a superuser account: $ make superuser Feedback 🙋‍♂️🙋‍♀️ We'd love to hear your thoughts, and hear about your experiments, so come and say hi on Matrix . Roadmap 💡 Want to know where the project is headed? 🗺️ Checkout our roadmap License 📝 This work is released under the MIT License (see LICENSE ). While Docs is a public-driven initiative, our license choice is an invitation for private sector actors to use, sell and contribute to the project. Contributing 🙌 This project is intended to be community-driven, so please, do not hesitate to get in touch if you have any question related to our implementation or design decisions. You can help us with translations on Crowdin . If you intend to make pull requests, see CONTRIBUTING for guidelines. Directory structure: docs ├── bin - executable scripts or binaries that are used for various tasks, such as setup scripts, utility scripts, or custom commands. ├── crowdin - for crowdin translations, a tool or service that helps manage translations for the project. ├── docker - Dockerfiles and related configuration files used to build Docker images for the project. These images can be used for development, testing, or production environments. ├── docs - documentation for the project, including user guides, API documentation, and other helpful resources. ├── env.d/development - environment-specific configuration files for the development environment. These files might include environment variables, configuration settings, or other setup files needed for development. ├── gitlint - configuration files for ` gitlint ` , a tool that enforces commit message guidelines to ensure consistency and quality in commit messages. ├── playground - experimental or temporary code, where developers can test new features or ideas without affecting the main codebase. └── src - main source code directory, containing the core application code, libraries, and modules of the project. Credits ❤️ Stack Docs is built on top of Django Rest Framework , Next.js , BlockNote.js , HocusPocus and Yjs . We thank the contributors of all these projects for their awesome work! We are proud sponsors of BlockNotejs and Yjs . Gov ❤️ open source Docs is the result of a joint effort led by the French 🇫🇷🥖 ( DINUM ) and German 🇩🇪🥨 governments ( ZenDiS ). We are always looking for new public partners (we are currently onboarding the Netherlands 🇳🇱🧀), feel free to reach out if you are interested in using or contributing to Docs.
