---
id: 358
url: https://github.com/openvenues/libpostal
title: 'GitHub - openvenues/libpostal: A C library for parsing/normalizing street
  addresses around the world. Powered by statistical NLP and open geo data.'
domain: github.com
source_date: '2025-07-09'
tags:
- github-repo
- c
- python
summary: '**libpostal** is a C library that parses and normalizes street addresses
  worldwide using statistical NLP and open data, supporting 100+ languages across
  230+ countries. It converts messy, human-entered addresses into clean, standardized
  formats suitable for machine comparison and indexing, making it ideal as a preprocessing
  tool for geocoding and location-based applications. The library offers language
  bindings for Python, Ruby, Go, Java, PHP, and NodeJS, and is trained on over 1 billion
  addresses using machine learning techniques.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# GitHub - openvenues/libpostal: A C library for parsing/normalizing street addresses around the world. Powered by statistical NLP and open geo data.

libpostal: international street address NLP libpostal is a C library for parsing/normalizing street addresses around the world using statistical NLP and open data. The goal of this project is to understand location-based strings in every language, everywhere. For a more comprehensive overview of the research behind libpostal, be sure to check out the (lengthy) introductory blog posts: Original post : Statistical NLP on OpenStreetMap Follow-up for 1.0 release : Statistical NLP on OpenStreetMap: Part 2 🇧🇷 🇫🇮 🇳🇬 🇯🇵 🇽🇰 🇧🇩 🇵🇱 🇻🇳 🇧🇪 🇲🇦 🇺🇦 🇯🇲 🇷🇺 🇮🇳 🇱🇻 🇧🇴 🇩🇪 🇸🇳 🇦🇲 🇰🇷 🇳🇴 🇲🇽 🇨🇿 🇹🇷 🇪🇸 🇸🇸 🇪🇪 🇧🇭 🇳🇱 🇨🇳 🇵🇹 🇵🇷 🇬🇧 🇵🇸 Addresses and the locations they represent are essential for any application dealing with maps (place search, transportation, on-demand/delivery services, check-ins, reviews). Yet even the simplest addresses are packed with local conventions, abbreviations and context, making them difficult to index/query effectively with traditional full-text search engines. This library helps convert the free-form addresses that humans use into clean normalized forms suitable for machine comparison and full-text indexing. Though libpostal is not itself a full geocoder, it can be used as a preprocessing step to make any geocoding application smarter, simpler, and more consistent internationally. 🇷🇴 🇬🇭 🇦🇺 🇲🇾 🇭🇷 🇭🇹 🇺🇸 🇿🇦 🇷🇸 🇨🇱 🇮🇹 🇰🇪 🇨🇭 🇨🇺 🇸🇰 🇦🇴 🇩🇰 🇹🇿 🇦🇱 🇨🇴 🇮🇱 🇬🇹 🇫🇷 🇵🇭 🇦🇹 🇱🇨 🇮🇸 🇮🇩 🇦🇪 🇸🇰 🇹🇳 🇰🇭 🇦🇷 🇭🇰 The core library is written in pure C. Language bindings for Python , Ruby , Go , Java , PHP , and NodeJS are officially supported and it's easy to write bindings in other languages. Sponsors If your company is using libpostal, consider asking your organization to sponsor the project. Interpreting what humans mean when they refer to locations is far from a solved problem, and sponsorships help us pursue new frontiers in geospatial NLP. As a sponsor, your company logo will appear prominently on the Github repo page along with a link to your site. Sponsorship info Backers Individual users can also help support open geo NLP research by making a monthly donation: Installation (Mac/Linux) Before you install, make sure you have the following prerequisites: On Ubuntu/Debian sudo apt-get install -y curl build-essential autoconf automake libtool pkg-config On CentOS/RHEL sudo yum install curl autoconf automake libtool pkgconfig On macOS Install with one command via MacPorts : port install libpostal Or with Homebrew : brew install libpostal To compile the C library from source: If you're using an M1 Mac, add --disable-sse2 to the ./configure command. This will result in poorer performance but the build will succeed. git clone https://github.com/openvenues/libpostal cd libpostal # skip if installing for the first time make distclean ./bootstrap.sh # omit --datadir flag to install data in current directory ./configure --datadir=[...some dir with a few GB of space where a "libpostal" directory exists or can be created/modified...] make -j4 # For Intel/AMD processors and the default model ./configure --datadir=[...some dir with a few GB of space where a "libpostal" directory exists or can be created/modified...] # For Apple / ARM cpus and the default model ./configure --datadir=[...some dir with a few GB of space where a "libpostal" directory exists or can be created/modified...] --disable-sse2 # For the improved Senzing model: ./configure --datadir=[...some dir with a few GB of space where a "libpostal" directory exists or can be created/modified...] MODEL=senzing make -j8 sudo make install # On Linux it's probably a good idea to run sudo ldconfig libpostal has support for pkg-config, so you can use the pkg-config to print the flags needed to link your program against it: pkg-config --cflags libpostal # print compiler flags pkg-config --libs libpostal # print linker flags pkg-config --cflags --libs libpostal # print both For example, if you write a program called app.c, you can compile it like this: gcc app.c `pkg-config --cflags --libs libpostal` Installation (Windows) MSys2/MinGW For Windows the build procedure currently requires MSys2 and MinGW. This can be downloaded from http://msys2.org . Please follow the instructions on the MSys2 website for installation. Please ensure Msys2 is up-to-date by running: pacman -Syu Install the following prerequisites: pacman -S autoconf automake curl git make libtool gcc mingw-w64-x86_64-gcc Then to build the C library: git clone https://github.com/openvenues/libpostal cd libpostal cp -rf windows/* ./ ./bootstrap.sh ./configure --datadir=[...some dir with a few GB of space...] make -j4 make install Notes: When setting the datadir, the C: drive would be entered as /c . The libpostal build script automatically add libpostal on the end of the path, so '/c' would become C:\libpostal\ on Windows. The compiled .dll will be in the src/.libs/ directory and should be called libpostal-1.dll . If you require a .lib import library to link this to your application. You can generate one using the Visual Studio lib.exe tool and the libpostal.def definition file: lib.exe /def:libpostal.def /out:libpostal.lib /machine:x64 Installation with an alternative data model An alternative data model is available for libpostal. It is created by Senzing Inc. for improved parsing on US, UK and Singapore addresses and improved US rural route address handling. To enable this add MODEL=senzing to the configure line during installation: ./configure --datadir=[...some dir with a few GB of space...] MODEL=senzing The data for this model is gotten from OpenAddress , OpenStreetMap and data generated by Senzing based on customer feedback (a few hundred records), a total of about 1.2 billion records of data from over 230 countries, in 100+ languages. The data from OpenStreetMap and OpenAddress is good but not perfect so the data set was modified by filtering out badly formed addresses, correcting misclassified address tokens and removing tokens that didn't belong in the addresses, whenever these conditions were encountered. Senzing created a data set of 12950 addresses from 89 countries that it uses to test and verify the quality of its models. The data set was generated using random addresses from OSM, minimally 50 per country. Hard-to-parse addresses were gotten from Senzing support team and customers and from the libpostal github page and added to this set. The Senzing model got 4.3% better parsing results than the default model, using this test set. The size of this model is about 2.2GB compared to 1.8GB for the default model so keep that in mind if storages space is important. Further information about this data model can be found at: https://github.com/Senzing/libpostal-data If you run into any issues with this model, whether they have to do with parses, installation or any other problems, then please report them at https://github.com/Senzing/libpostal-data Examples of parsing libpostal's international address parser uses machine learning (Conditional Random Fields) and is trained on over 1 billion addresses in every inhabited country on Earth. We use OpenStreetMap and OpenAddresses as sources of structured addresses, and the OpenCage address format templates at: https://github.com/OpenCageData/address-formatting to construct the training data, supplementing with containing polygons, and generating sub-building components like apartment/floor numbers and PO boxes. We also add abbreviations, drop out components at random, etc. to make the parser as robust as possible to messy real-world input. These example parse results are taken from the interactive address_parser program that builds with libpostal when you run make . Note that the parser can handle commas vs. no commas as well as various casings and permutations of components (if the input is e.g. just city or just city/postcode). The parser achieves very high accuracy on held-out data, currently 99.45% correct full parses (meaning a 1 in the numerator for getting every token in the address correct). Usage (parser) Here's an example of the parser API using the Python bindings: from postal . parser import parse_address parse_address ( 'The Book Club 100-106 Leonard St Shoreditch London EC2A 4RH, United Kingdom' ) And an example with the C API: #include <stdio.h> #include <stdlib.h> #include <libpostal/libpostal.h> int main ( int argc , char * * argv ) { // Setup (only called once at the beginning of your program) if (! libpostal_setup () || ! libpostal_setup_parser ()) { exit ( EXIT_FAILURE ); } libpostal_address_parser_options_t options = libpostal_get_address_parser_default_options (); libpostal_address_parser_response_t * parsed = libpostal_parse_address ( "781 Franklin Ave Crown Heights Brooklyn NYC NY 11216 USA" , options ); for ( size_t i = 0 ; i < parsed -> num_components ; i ++ ) { printf ( "%s: %s\n" , parsed -> labels [ i ], parsed -> components [ i ]); } // Free parse result libpostal_address_parser_response_destroy ( parsed ); // Teardown (only called once at the end of your program) libpostal_teardown (); libpostal_teardown_parser (); } Parser labels The address parser can technically use any string labels that are defined in the training data, but these are the ones currently defined, based on the fields defined in OpenCage's address-formatting library , as well as a few added by libpostal to handle specific patterns: house : venue name e.g. "Brooklyn Academy of Music", and building names e.g. "Empire State Building" category : for category queries like "restaurants", etc. near : phrases like "in", "near", etc. used after a category phrase to help with parsing queries like "restaurants in Brooklyn" house_number : usually refers to the external (street-facing) building number. In some countries this may be a compount, hyphenated number which also includes an apartment number, or a block number (a la Japan), but libpostal will just call it the house_number for simplicity. road : street name(s) unit : an apartment, unit, office, lot, or other secondary unit designator level : expres
