---
id: 145
url: https://generativehistory.substack.com/p/has-google-quietly-solved-two-of
title: Has Google Quietly Solved Two of AI’s Oldest Problems?
domain: generativehistory.substack.com
source_date: '2025-11-15'
tags:
- ai
- llm
- news
summary: Google appears to be testing a new AI model (possibly Gemini-3) through its
  AI Studio that demonstrates near-perfect handwriting recognition combined with sophisticated
  reasoning abilities—capabilities the author describes as solving two longstanding
  AI challenges. The model excels not just at transcribing historical handwritten
  documents at expert human levels, but also at contextual analysis and logical inference
  needed to decipher unclear or ambiguous text. If verified, this breakthrough could
  revolutionize fields requiring both visual precision and skilled reasoning, such
  as historical research and document analysis.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Has Google Quietly Solved Two of AI’s Oldest Problems?

Has Google Quietly Solved Two of AI’s Oldest Problems? A mysterious new model currently in testing on Google’s AI Studio is nearly perfect on automated handwriting recognition but it is also showing signs of spontaneous, abstract, symbolic reasoning. Mark Humphries Oct 17, 2025 214 43 23 Share Google has a webapp called AI Studio where people can experiment with prompts and models. In the last week, users have found that every once in awhile they will get two results and are asked to select the better one. The big AI labs typically do this type of A/B testing on new models just before they’re released, so speculation is rampant that this might be Gemini-3. Whatever it is, users have reported some truly wild things: it codes fully functioning Windows and Apple OS clones , 3D design software, Nintendo emulators, and productivity suites from single prompts. Curious, I tried it out on transcribing some handwritten texts and the results were shocking: not only was the transcription very nearly perfect—at expert human levels—but it did a something else unexpected that can only be described as genuine, human-like, expert level reasoning. It is the most amazing thing I have seen an LLM do, and it was unprompted, entirely accidental. What follows are my first impressions of this new model with all the requisite caveats that entails. But if my observations hold true, this will be a big deal when it’s released. We appear to be on the cusp of an era when AI models will not only start to read difficult handwritten historical documents just as well as expert humans but also analyze them in deep and nuanced ways. While this is important for historians, we need to extrapolate from this small example to think more broadly: if this holds the models are about to make similar leaps in any field where visual precision and skilled reasoning must work together required. As is so often the case with AI, that is exciting and frightening all at once. Even a few months ago, I thought this level of capability was still years away. A New Model Rumours started appearing on X a week ago that there was a new Gemini model in A/B testing in AI Studio. It’s always hard to know what these mean but I wanted to see how well this thing would do on handwritten historical documents because that has become my own personal benchmark. I am interested in LLM performance on handwriting for a couple of reasons. First, I am a historian so I intuitively see why fast, cheap, and accurate transcription would be useful to me in my day-to-day work . But in trying to achieve that, and in learning about AI, I have come to believe that recognizing historical handwriting poses something of a unique challenge and a great overall test for LLM abilities in general. I also think it shines a small amount of light on the larger question of whether LLMs will ultimately prove capable of expert human levels of reasoning or prove to be a dead end. Let me explain. Most people think that deciphering historical handwriting is a task that mainly requires vision. I agree that this is true, but only to a point. When you step back in time, you enter a different country, or so the saying goes. People talk differently, using unfamiliar words or familiar words in unfamiliar ways. People in the past used different systems of measurement and accounting, different turns of phrase, punctuation, capitalization, and spelling. Implied meanings were different as were assumptions about what readers would know. While it can be easy to decipher most of the words in a historical text, without contextual knowledge about the topic and time period it’s nearly impossible to understand a document well-enough to accurately transcribe the whole thing—let alone to use it effectively. The irony is that some of the most crucial information in historical letters is also the most period specific and thus hardest to decipher. Even beyond context awareness, though, paleography involves linking vision with reasoning to make logical inferences: we use known words and thus known letters to identify uncertain letters. As we shall see, documents very often become logic puzzles and LLMs have mixed performance on logic puzzles, especially novel formulations they have not been trained on. For this reason, it has been my intuition for some time that models would either solve the problem of historical handwriting and other similar problems as they increased in scale, or they would plateau at high but imperfect, sub-human expert levels of accuracy. Prediction Can Only Get You So Far… I don’t want to get too technical here, but it is important to understand why these types of things are so hard for LLMs and why the results I am reporting here are significant. Since the first vision model, GPT-4, was released in February 2023, we’ve seen HTR scores steadily improve to the point that they get about 90% (or more) of a given text correct. Much of this can be chalked up to technical improvements in image processing and better training data, but it’s that last 10% that I’ve been talking about above. Remember that LLMs are inherently predictive by nature, trained to choose the most probable way to complete a sequence like “the cat sat on the …”. They are, in effect, made up of tables which record those probabilities. Spelling errors and stylistic inconsistencies are, by definition, unpredictable, low probability answers and so LLMs must chafe against their training data to transcribe “the cat sat on the rugg” instead of “mat”. This is also why LLMs are not very good at transcribing unfamiliar people’s names (especially last names), obscure places, dates, or numbers such as sums of money. From a statistical point of view, these all appear as arbitrary choices to an LLM with no meaningful differences in their statistical probabilities: in isolation, one is no more likely than another. Was a letter written by Richard Darby or Richard Derby? Was it dated 15 March 1762 or 16 March 1782? Did the author enclosed a bill for 339 dollars or 331 dollars? Correct answer to those questions cannot normally be predicted from the preceding contents of a letter. You need other types of information to find the answer when letters prove indecipherable. Yet basic correctness on these types of information—names, dates, places, and sums—is a prerequisite to their being useful to me as a historian. This makes the final mile of accuracy the only one that really counts. On Scaling, Plateaus, and Benchmarks More importantly, these issues with handwriting recognition are only one small facet of a much larger debate about whether the predictive architecture behind LLMs is inherently limiting or whether scaling (making the models larger) will allow the models to break free of regurgitation and do something new. So when I benchmark an LLM on handwriting, in my mind I feel I am also getting some insight into that larger question of whether LLMs are plateauing or continuing to grow in capabilities. To benchmark LLM handwriting accuracy, l ast year Dr. Lianne Leddy and I developed a set of 50 documents comprising some 10,000 words —we had to choose them carefully and experiment to ensure that these documents were not already in the LLM training data (full disclosure: we can’t know for sure, but we took every reasonable precaution). We’ve written about the set several times before , but in short it includes dozens of different hands, images captured with a variety of tools from smartphones to scanners, and document with different styles of writing from virtually illiterate scrawl to formal secretary hand. In my experience, they are representative of the types of documents that I, and English-language historian currently working on 18 th and 19 th century records, most often encounter. We measure transcription error rates in terms of the percentage of incorrect characters (CER) and words (WER) in a given text. These are standardized but blunt instruments: a word may be spelled correctly but if the first letter is wrongly capitalized or it is followed with a comma rather than a semicolon it counts as an erroneous word. But what constitutes an error is also not always clear. Capitalization and punctuation were not standardized until the 20 th century (in English) and are often ambiguous in historical documents. Another example: should we transcribe the long f (as in leſs) using an “f” for the first “s” or just write it out as “less”? That’s a judgement call. Sometimes letters and whole words are simply indecipherable and up for interpretation. In truth, it’s usually impossible to score 100% accuracy in most real-world scenarios. Studies show that non-professionals typically score WERs of 4-10% . Even professional transcription services expect a few errors. They typically guarantee a 1% WER (or around a 2-3% CER), but only when the texts are clear and readable. So that is essentially the ceiling in terms of accuracy. Figure 1: Performance of Trasnskribus, Humans, and Google models on HTR over time Last winter, on our test-set, Gemini-2.5-Pro began to score in the human range: a strict CER of 4% and WER of 11%. When we excluded errors of punctuation and capitalization—errors that don’t change the actual meaning of the text or its usefulness for search and readability purposes—those scores dropped to CERs of 2% and WERs of 4%. The best specialized HTR software achieves CERs around 8% and WERs around 20% without specialized training which reduces errors rates to about those of Gemini-2.5-Pro. Improvement has indeed been steady across each generation of models. Those of Gemini-2.5-Pro were about 50-70% better than the ones we reported for Gemini-1.5-Pro a few months before, which were about 50-70% better than the initial scores reported for GPT-4 a few months before that. A similar progression is evident in Google’s faster, cheaper version of Gemini-FlashThe open question has been: will they keep improving at a similar rate. Expert Human Performance? On a (Canadian) Tha
