---
id: 819
url: https://www.heywhatsthat.com/faq.html
title: HeyWhatsThat Sitemap/FAQ
domain: www.heywhatsthat.com
source_date: '2026-02-12'
tags:
- web-dev
- astronomy
summary: HeyWhatsThat is a web tool that identifies mountains and landscape features
  visible from any location on Earth by generating 360° panoramic sketches labeled
  with peak names. The site offers additional features including visibility maps (viewsheds)
  showing all areas visible from a location, elevation profiles, and astronomy tools
  for eclipse simulations and night sky viewing. Users can generate their own panoramas
  by selecting a location on the map or entering coordinates, and explore various
  visualizations like contour lines and sight lines to distant peaks.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# HeyWhatsThat Sitemap/FAQ

Home Technical FAQ Mobile FAQ Sign up Looking for Sea Level Rise or other mapplets? Visit our new Sea Level , Contours , and Profiler pages. WHAT'S HEYWHATSTHAT? You hike to the top of a mountain or pull off at a scenic overlook. You see mountains in the distance. Which mountains are they? HeyWhatsThat will tell you, providing a 360° panoramic sketch labeled with the names of the peaks you're looking at. From almost anywhere in the world. Our current offerings: The main site computes the horizon and mountain names and other related visualizations, including the surface of the Earth visible from where you're standing (the visibility cloak or viewshed ) and the line of sight profile between you and the distant peaks. You can view panoramas that someone else has requested and generate your own. ( FAQ ) The Path Profiler allows you to create a path and generate its elevation profile. ( FAQ ) We're running on several models of mobile phone ( FAQ ). For the iPhone and Android , use your mobile browser to visit m.heywt.com . (We're developing an Android application that takes advantage of the built-in compass, but it hasn't been tested on much hardware ...) Turning to astronomy , our Eclipse site uses the Google Earth plug-in (currently only available for Windows and Mac OSX) to simulate solar and lunar eclipses. Our Planisphere enhances the night sky feature of Google Earth by providing overlays of your horizon, an azimuth/altitude grid, and the positions of the Sun, Moon and planets. ( FAQ ) And the Cosmic Visibility page does the same inside your web browser, giving you new insight into the Moon's phases and the Earth's seasons and what you can see on Mars. ( FAQ ) At HeyWhatsThat -- Russia? we tell you where in Alaska you can see Russia. And we've written Mapplets for elevation contours , path profiles , and sea level rise . ( FAQ ) Our Reviews page will show you what other people are saying about us, and the Technical FAQ explores issues like the visibility cloak, the elevation profile, and public APIs to our services. Why isn't it working with my browser? We develop and debug this site with Firefox , so the layout might be incorrect and some features may not work if you're using a different browser. How do I get more information? In addition to the general FAQ you're reading right now, we've got a technical FAQ and a planisphere FAQ . See what other people are saying on our reviews page. We gave a Google Tech Talk Hey, What's That? A Map Hack . Sign up for our occasional email announcements or follow @heywhatsthat on Twitter. And please contact us at MAIN SITE How do I choose a panorama to view? Click the tab labelled All panoramas to see all the panoramas currently available to you. These include queries you have made ( ), queries that other folks have made and set public ( ). and queries that you've made and set public ( ). To view a panorama, click on a map marker or a name on the panorama list and hit View . Or select a panorama from the dropdown in the View tab. I'm looking at a panorama. What do I see? When you view a panorama (e.g. the view from Mount Battie in Camden, Maine ), you'll see three panes: a panorama image, a Google Map, and a list of peaks. The peaks are marked on the image and the map with red triangles ( ), and the viewer location on the map is marked with . You can click on the panorama image, on the Google map, or on the list of peaks and the other panes will react. When you click on the map or panorama image, if you click right on a peak, it will be highlighted; if you miss a peak, you'll get a sight line on the map and the panorama showing you where you're looking. You can toggle between bearings relative to true or magnetic north. You're not telling me the name of the mountain I'm looking at. For a peak to be detected by the system, it must appear against the horizon, it must be an elevation maximum with enough slope on either side to be visible to the naked eye (a few arcminutes is what we look for), and it must be listed in the database of features we're using. If you're curious about a peak that's missing from the list, clicking on the panorama and following the resulting line on the Google map should get you to its name, or at least its latitude and longitude. Yeah, but I'm sure I see Mount Jellyfish when I'm on Mount Squid. If you're actively looking for a particular peak -- i.e. it's not that you see something and want to know what it is, but that you know something is there and keep looking until you find it -- then you'll probably need less of it to be visible than our algorithm requires. And it could be that there are special atmospheric conditions working in your favor. We discuss refraction a bit below and in more detail in the technical FAQ , and acknowledge that our computations don't cover all possible circumstances. On the other hand, meteorologists have told us that refraction can really only do so much. There are other possible phenomena: we particularly like the section How far can you see? at Distance to the Horizon and the technical discussion at Mirages . We're constantly refining our approach, and welcome your comments and suggestions at Okay, I can click around and see the peaks. What else can I do? While viewing a panorama, hit the Visibility cloak button on the map. We overlay the map with red pixels indicating all the ground area that can be seen from the viewer's location. For example, we predict that from the top of Mount Washington the farthest you can see is Saddleback Mountain, 137 miles away in Maine at 45.51°N 69.135°W. (This is not the Saddleback Mountain ski resort in Rangeley at 44.946°N 70.526°W, though much of that is also covered by the visibility cloak.) Outside of HeyWhatsThat.com the visibility cloak is known as the viewshed . Among its many uses: it can give you an idea of where your proposed building will be visible from, and it will show the area covered by line of sight communications (be sure to set your tower height when you make your query). Next? Hit the Contours button. As you move around the map you'll see contour lines (lines of constant elevation). Hover over the button to see the interval between contour lines. (Finer control over contours -- setting your own intervals and color -- is available in the Elevation Contours mapplet; see the mapplet FAQ. ) And? The next thing to try is the Show profile button on the upper right. This opens a new pane displaying the elevation of the path you'd walk travelling from the viewer location to any spot you click on. (You can draw arbitrary paths and draw their elevation profiles with the Path Profiler and the Path Profiler mapplet .) Wait a minute. I was looking at the Mount Washington panorama and hit Show Profile . Then I zoomed out on the map and clicked on a spot in Rocky Mountain National Park in Colorado. The profile showed a continuous line between the two spots. Does this mean I can see Colorado from Mount Washington? No. Note the 'flat earth' checkbox just under the profile. If it's checked, the profile window is simply an elevation graph and doesn't include the effects of the curvature of the Earth; if not checked, you'll see that the Earth gets in the way. (Note that the computations for the visibility cloak and the list of visible peaks include the Earth's curvature, and the refraction of light as well.) How do I generate my own panorama? Open the request form by clicking on the New panorama tab. Set the desired viewer location by clicking on the map, by entering the latitude and longitude, or by looking up an address. If you're manually entering latitude and longitude, use decimal degrees 44.0538 , degrees with decimal minutes 44 3.23 , or degrees minutes seconds 44 03 14 . (Spaces are optional, but if you don't use spaces, be sure to include leading zeroes, e.g. for 44° 3.23' use 4403.23 , not 443.23 .) Check that you have the signs correct; in the continental US, longitudes should be negative numbers and latitudes positive. Use the default elevation of six feet above ground level, or explicitly set the elevation on the form. If you want to be sure you're running the calculation on a peak, use the Move button and dropdown to move to the highest nearby point. For example, suppose careful map reading tells you the peak of Bald Mountain is at 44.232°, -69.136°. According to the elevation data we use, that point is actually north of the summit, and the resulting panorama would have the southern view blocked. Use Move to make sure your request matches where our elevation data puts the peak, 44.22972°, -69.13667° in this case. Hit the Submit request button when you're done. While the request is being processed you can view other results and enter other queries; a window will pop up when the computation is finished. Can I share this query with others? You can email someone a link that will open a particular panorama; click on Email this panorama while viewing a panorama. You can also make your queries visible to everyone who visits the site. All panoramas will show you all the panoramas that you have generated (along with those that other users have made public). Click on a map marker or a name in the list to delete or to change the public/private status of your own queries. By email? How do I do this by email? Email to . You can send either your latitude and longitude or an address. In either case we ignore the subject line, but the request comprises the entire body of the message, so don't send HTML formatted messages or any extra text. For latitude and longitude, send just the latitude and longitude. Follow the coordinates with a p if you want the system to run the computations from where it thinks the peak is (but no more than 100 feet away). Latitude and longitude can be entered exactly as described above; be sure to use negative values for west longitudes and south latitudes. For example, the email message body 442107 -693201 p asks for latitude 44°21'7" north longitude 69°32'1"
