---
id: 158
url: https://how-did-i-get-here.net/
title: How Did I Get Here?
domain: how-did-i-get-here.net
source_date: '2025-11-08'
tags:
- cli-tool
- tutorial
- distributed-systems
- web-dev
summary: This webpage demonstrates a custom traceroute tool called **ktr** that visualizes
  the network path your data takes to reach the website's server. The site explains
  how traceroute works using ICMP packets with decreasing TTL values, while also educating
  readers about Internet infrastructure including autonomous systems (ASes), ASNs,
  WHOIS lookups, and BGP routing protocols. The author cleverly streams real-time
  results using HTTP server-push and CSS tricks, while noting that the displayed "reverse
  traceroute" from server to user provides an approximate (rather than exact) representation
  of the actual packet path.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# How Did I Get Here?

ktr [v0.6.1] your device (76.119.78.30) -> how-did-i-get-here.net (95.216.201.85) 2026-01-12T22:21:17 Host ASN Network Region (traceroute is loading...) Our server -> how-did-i-get-here.net AS24940 Hetzner Online Europe This part of the page is still loading while I wait for the above traceroute to load. Behind the Scenes To reach this website, your computer sent some packets across the Internet. If we’re curious what that path was, we can run a tool to generate a traceroute — a rough list of every server your packets touched to reach their destination. To build this website ( source code on GitHub ), I wrote my own traceroute program called ktr ( also open source ) that can stream results in real time while concurrently looking up interesting information about each hop. How does ktr work? Let’s start with a simplified explanation of Internet routing. Starting with the source device, each computer that handles a packet has to choose the best device to forward it to — I will explain how these routing decisions are made in a bit. Assuming everything works correctly, the packet will eventually reach a router that knows how to send it directly to its destination. My traceroute implementation uses a protocol called ICMP . ICMP was designed specifically for sending diagnostic information around the Internet, and, helpfully, almost every Internet-connected device speaks it. Interestingly, ICMP packets have a “TTL” (time to live) field. This isn’t actually a “time” as implied by a name — it’s a countdown! Every time a router forwards an ICMP packet along, it’s supposed to decrement the TTL number. When the TTL hits zero, the router should stop forwarding it along and instead send an error message to the packet’s source IP saying that the packet has reached its maximum number of hops. We can take advantage of this TTL feature! To do a traceroute, we can send a bunch of ICMP packets with increasingly large TTLs. The first packet with a TTL of 1 will error on the first device it reaches, and so on, until we hopefully get an error back from every routing device that touched the packet. These error packets include diagnostic information like the IP address of the device that sent the error, allowing us to trace your packets’ rough path across the Internet. Frontend Fun This page will work perfectly fine with JavaScript disabled. From the browser’s perspective, this website just loaded slowly. From your perspective, a traceroute magically loaded in. When you loaded this website, my program received a HTTP request coming from your IP address. It immediately started running a traceroute to your IP. Then, the server started responding to the HTTP request: it sent the beginning of this web page, and then it left the connection open. As ktr, my traceroute program, gave the server updates on your traceroute, it rendered the relevant HTML and sent it to your computer. When the traceroute finished, the server generated all the text and sent the rest of the website along the line before closing out the connection. You may have noticed that the traceroute progressively loads in lines above the bottom line. Web pages can only load forward. Since I didn’t want to use any JavaScript, I did the hackiest thing possible: every time I update the traceroute display, I embed a CSS block that hides the previous iteration! Since browsers render CSS as the page is loading, this made it look like the traceroute was being edited over time. Front to Back, Back to Front My claim that this website’s traceroute was the path your packets took to reach my server was a bit of a white lie. To calculate that, I would’ve had to be able to run a traceroute to my server from your computer. Instead, I ran the traceroute from my server to your computer and just reversed it. That’s also why the traceroute at the top seemingly loads in reverse order. Does running a “reverse traceroute” sacrifice accuracy? A little, actually. As I said when describing Internet routing, each device a packet traverses makes a decision about where to send the packet next until it reaches its final destination. If you send a packet in the other direction, the devices might make different routing decisions… and if one device makes one different decision, the rest of the path will certainly be different. This reverse traceroute is still helpful. The paths will be roughly the same, likely differing only in terms of which specific routers see your packet. So, What Are All Those Networks? This site began with talk about the “networks” you traversed to reach my server. What, concretely, are these networks? Each network, also called an autonomous system (AS), is a collection of routers and servers that are privately connected to each other and generally owned by the same company. The owners of these autonomous systems decide the shape of the Internet by choosing which other autonomous systems to connect to. Internet traffic travels across autonomous systems that have “peering arrangements” with each other. The Internet is often described as an open, almost anarchistic network connecting computers, some owned by people like you and me, and some owned by companies. In reality, the Internet is a network of corporation-owned networks, access and control to which is governed by financial transactions and dripping with bureaucracy. If you want your own autonomous system, you can apply for an autonomous system number (ASN) with one of the five regional Internet registries (RIRs) that govern the Internet’s numbers. Be warned, they probably won’t listen to you if you aren’t backed by a company or you don’t have enough points of presence on the Internet. Just like we use IP addresses to identify— Wait, what exactly do IP addresses identify? Uh… let’s say they represent devices with Internet access. … Just like we use IP addresses to identify devices with Internet access, we use ASNs to identify the networks of the Internet. Those are the numbers like “AS24940” in the traceroute from the start. Notes on WHOIS One of the reasons I wrote a cool traceroute program myself is so I could pull information on which autonomous systems own the IPs along your traceroute. A couple of organizations try to keep track of which ASes contain which IP addresses. Many of them let you perform ASN lookups using the WHOIS protocol , so I wrote a small client to parse the responses from some servers I arbitrarily selected. I then used this cool database called PeeringDB to figure out the companies behind the ASNs; PeeringDB has information on about 1/3rd of all autonomous systems. I used all of this information, alongside a couple hundred lines of if statements, to generate the text about network traversal for you. WHOIS is actually an... interesting protocol to make a parser for. It turns out that the WHOIS protocol specification doesn't actually specify much. It specifies that you should make a TCP connection to the WHOIS server, send whatever you want to look up, and the server will send back some info and then terminate the connection. That’s all. And yet, a lot of WHOIS servers will respond with structured-seeming information: It turns out this structure is made up by the WHOIS server administrator and there just happen to be some shared conventions between servers. Even with the level of structure, the fields you want often show up with different names (origin? originas?) or even under multiple places at once. My “parser” ended up as less of a parser and more as a lightweight simulator of how I, a human, might read through WHOIS results to find the ASN I need. BGP When you send a packet across the Internet, routers sitting at the borders where these networks connect decide which network to send your packet to next, until it reaches the network that contains the destination device. These border routers talk to each other about which networks they’re able to connect to using a protocol called Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). BGP is the protocol that gives the Internet its shape, and you can’t directly speak it yourself . History Time In 1969, the same year Neil Armstrong landed on the moon, a message was (partially) sent on a prototype of the ARPANET. Over the next 20 years, this “network of interconnected computers” thing got pretty popular and everyone wanted on the train. Various universities, government agencies, and a couple random companies started making networks of their computers left and right. A couple of these organizations started connecting their networks together so they could share data more easily. The Internet as we know it didn’t exist yet, but these network interconnections were getting out of hand and there wasn’t a great standard for coordinating them. In 1989, engineers at Cisco and IBM published RFC 1105 , describing the first ever version of BGP. Over the next couple of years, interconnected-network people got really busy as “the Internet” rapidly became a thing. Just one year after the BGP v1 RFC, Cisco went public and brought a lot of money into the networking industry, the term “IANA” was first used to refer to the random guy and his college department that were keeping track of numbers on the Internet, ARPANET shut down for good, and BGP v2 was released. In 1994, as the Internet-is-a-thing-now whirlwind was just beginning to calm, the final major version of BGP, v4, was specified in RFC 1654 . It was revised twice (in 1995 and 2006 ) and got some patches, but BGP v4 is still the protocol we use for choosing routes across the interconnected networks that make up the modern Internet. How Does This BGP Thing Work? Routers at the borders between autonomous systems (“border gateways”) keep a list of every BGP route they know about, called a routing table . Each BGP route specifies the path of ASNs that could be followed to reach an autonomous system that controls a certain collection of IP addresses. These routes across the Internet are formed by peering relationships between autonomous systems. Wh
