---
id: 332
url: http://blog.nilenso.com/blog/2025/06/23/how-i-keep-up-with-ai-progress/
title: How I keep up with AI progress - nilenso blog
domain: blog.nilenso.com
source_date: '2025-07-19'
tags:
- ai
- llm
- tutorial
summary: This blog post provides a curated guide for staying informed about AI progress
  through a balanced information pipeline. The author emphasizes the importance of
  building a solid understanding of AI to avoid common pitfalls—either dismissing
  it as hype or overestimating its capabilities—by following trustworthy sources and
  staying close to primary sources rather than sensationalized media coverage. The
  recommended resources include technical experts like Simon Willison and Andrej Karpathy,
  official announcements from major AI labs (OpenAI, Google DeepMind, Anthropic),
  and experienced AI engineers who share practical insights on building and evaluating
  AI systems.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# How I keep up with AI progress - nilenso blog

Atharva Raykar Read more by Atharva here Last Updated: 30th June 2025 Generative AI has been the fastest moving technology I have seen in my lifetime. Its also happens to be terribly misunderstood. We have already seen large companies and even governments ship dysfunctional or even dangerous AI products. Sufficiently uninformed people misunderstand how to apply AI with concretely negative consequences. The most common errors of misunderstanding are either underestimation (“it’s all hype that will blow over”) or overestimation (“I don’t need programmers anymore”). These patterns are rooted in a lack of a solid understanding of the technology and how it is evolving over time. It’s surprisingly challenging to build a clear understanding of AI. We are in one of the most polluted information environments. If you’re not being deliberate about it, you are likely exposed to a lot of misinformation that overstates or dismisses AI capabilities. To help with this, I’ve curated a list of sources that make up an information pipeline that I consider balanced and healthy. If you’re late to the game, consider this a good starting point. Table of Contents General guidelines Starting Points Simon Willison’s Blog Andrej Karpathy Every’s Chain of Thought Official announcements, blogs and papers from those building AI High signal people to follow Hamel Husain Shreya Shankar Jason Liu Eugene Yan What We’ve Learned From A Year of Building with LLMs Chip Huyen Omar Khattab Kwindla Hultman Kramer Han Chung Lee Jo Kristian Bergum David Crawshaw Alexander Doria / Pierre Carl-Langlais Nathan Lambert’s “Interconnects” Ethan Mollick Arvind Narayanan and Sayash Kapoor’s “AI Snake Oil” News and Media Twitter / X Shawn Wang aka swyx / AI news by smol.ai Dwarkesh Patel Esoterica LessWrong / AI Alignment Forum Gwern Prompt Whisperers and Latent space explorers Do I chug water from a firehose? General guidelines Stay close to the source. The further you stray from reading official announcements and write-ups from the AI labs, the more likely you are going to be exposed to noise. Always assume that all reporting is wrong by default, unless it’s coming from the primary source, or one of the people listed here. Follow trustworthy individuals for commentary. I have linked to many individuals who talk about AI developments in good faith and engage with a deep sense of curiosity. Starting Points Simon Willison’s Blog ( link ) The best starting point for most technical people. If I had to only pick one stream of information, it would be this one. He’s also known for creating Django and Datasette. Expect: Commentary on the frontier of AI capabilities. Application layer use cases. Commentary on security issues and ethics. A sample: The Lethal Trifecta , LLMs in 2024 Andrej Karpathy ( Twitter and YouTube ) Director of AI @ Tesla, founding member of OpenAI. The best starting point to get an overview of how the models themselves work. His 3.5 hour video is the best million feet overview on the internals of LLMs and surprisingly approachable for relatively non-technical people too. Expect: Commentary on the frontier of AI capabilities Approachable explanations on the internals of AI (I haven’t gone through all of these yet, but heard praise for his GPT-2 from scratch and zero to hero tutorials) Strong cultural influence and observations on AI impact. He coined the terms “vibe coding” and “jagged intelligence”. A sample: Deep Dive into LLMs like ChatGPT , How I Use LLMs Every’s Chain of Thought ( link ) Written by Dan Shipper, the co-founder of Every. I like going through their test runs of the latest frontier models. It’s also a good way to get a sense of how these AI models can be used everyday. Expect: Practical applications of AI at work. Vibe-checks for model capabilities outside of benchmark numbers. A sample: Vibe Check: Codex , Vibe Check: o3 Official announcements, blogs and papers from those building AI Even though these labs sometimes get a bad rap for hyping up AI capabilities, their official announcements have a lot of valuable and generally accurate information on the capabilities of AI. Always look out for the announcements from OpenAI , Google DeepMind , Anthropic , DeepSeek , Meta AI , xAI and Qwen . Most labs usually have a bunch of useful resources that help deepen your understanding of LLM capabilities. Announcement blog posts for an overview Example: OpenAI o3 announcement post . Official engineering blogs, guides and cookbooks Examples: Engineering at Anthropic , OpenAI’s voice agent guide , Gemini Cookbook System/Model Cards for more details on the models—expect more detailed information on context windows, benchmarks, safety testing, etc Example: Claude 4 System Card Research Papers Examples: DeepSeek R1’s paper about RL , Anthropic’s On the Biology of a Large Language Model If you see anyone making an explosive claim about capabilities, or quoting some research from these labs, I always bypass the person making the claim and read it straight from the source, with the surrounding context. A caveat: the cookbooks may not represent the ideal way to do things in my experience, even if they are an excellent starting point. We’re all still figuring this out . Your own experience of putting AI capabilities into production backed by data trumps everything. It’s occasionally worth keeping tabs on smaller players like Nous Research , Allen AI , Prime Intellect , Pleias (open source, open research), Cohere (enterprise) and Goodfire (interpretability research). A lot of them go into technical depth that I don’t have the prerequisites to fully understand, but it gave me some sense of what’s happening outside the frontier labs and my AI engineering bubble. Interestingly, I have noticed (especially with the first few examples) these labs are willing to talk more about what exactly they are doing compared to frontier labs. High signal people to follow These are people who have contributed to the AI Engineering ecosystem in various ways, either by building open source tooling or putting in the work of integrating these AI models. Often, I’ve found more detailed and helpful recommendations than what the official cookbooks and guides suggest. Hamel Husain ( link ) Machine Learning Engineer, runs a consultancy. Contributed to a few ML tools. Expect: Great write-ups on evals and continuously improving AI systems. Notes on using libraries while building AI tools. A sample: Your AI Product Needs Evals , LLM Eval FAQ Shreya Shankar ( link ) Researcher at UC Berkeley. Has been writing about AI engineering the last few years. Expect: Great write-ups on evals and continuously improving AI systems. Field notes, musings, experiments. A sample: Data Flywheels for LLM Applications , Short Musings on AI Engineering and “Failed AI Projects” Jason Liu ( link ) Independent consultant, ML Engineer, creator of Instructor . Expect: Detailed write-ups on RAG, evals and continuously improving AI systems. AI consulting guides (especially for indie consultants). A sample: The RAG Playbook , Common RAG Mistakes Eugene Yan ( link ) Principal Applied Scientist at Amazon, specialises in RecSys, currently working on LLM systems. Expect: Detailed write-ups on LLMs, digging a bit more into ML/Language Model fundamentals and the math behind it. Write-ups on side projects and prototypes. A sample: Task-Specific LLM Evals that Do & Don’t Work , AlignEval , Intuition on Attention What We’ve Learned From A Year of Building with LLMs (link) This is an ensemble of practitioners who have written down everything they’ve learnt about building with LLMs. Includes all the practitioners mentioned above! Chip Huyen ( link ) ML Engineer, author of books on ML systems and AI Engineering. AI Engineering is a good book. Expect: Commentary and recommendations on building AI systems in production. Highly detailed engineering blog posts on AI engineering and ML systems. A sample: Common pitfalls when building generative AI applications , Agents Omar Khattab (link to website and twitter ) Research Scientist at Databricks, creator of DSPy. Expect: Write-ups on better abstractions than prompts (DSPy addresses this). Commentary on emerging research. A sample: A Guide to Large Language Model Abstractions , twitter post on better abstractions for AI apps Kwindla Hultman Kramer (link to blogs and twitter ) CEO and co-founder of Daily , which created the Pipecat framework for multimodal AI applications. Expect: Commentary on the frontier of realtime voice/video AI capabilities. Detailed guides on building state-of-the-art realtime voice AI agents A sample: Voice AI and Voice Agents: An Illustrated Primer , Advice on Building Voice AI in June 2025 . Han Chung Lee ( link ) Machine Learning Engineer. Expect: Crisp write-ups on ML techniques relevant to building AI applications. Deep (and not-so-deep) dives into AI applications and frameworks. Commentary on AI dev tooling. A sample: MCP is not REST API , Poking around Claude Code , MLOps Lessons from ChatGPT’s ‘Sycophantic’ Rollback Jo Kristian Bergum ( link ) Founder of vespa.ai Expect: Commentary on the “R” in RAG. A sample: Search is the natural abstraction for augmenting AI with moving context . David Crawshaw ( link ) Co-founder of Tailscale, seasoned software engineer. Expect: Good write-ups on software engineering in general. Of late, write-ups on programming with AI. A sample: How I program with LLMs , How I program with Agents Alexander Doria / Pierre Carl-Langlais ( link ) Trains LLMs at Pleias . Expect: Excellent posts that go into some details of training processes. Observations and opinions on where the industry is heading. A sample: The Model is the Product , A Realistic AI Timeline Nathan Lambert’s “Interconnects” ( link ) Machine Learning Researcher, Post-training lead at Allen AI Expect: Long-form technical analysis on “specific aspects of current AI training, deployment, systems, or impacts” High signal, opinionated takes and analysis on AI devel
