---
id: 127
url: https://gwern.net/doc/psychology/linguistics/2024-fedorenko.pdf
title: Language is primarily a tool for communication rather than thought
domain: gwern.net
source_date: '2025-11-29'
tags:
- academic-paper
summary: This Nature perspective argues that language functions primarily as a tool
  for communication rather than for thought, contrary to long-held theories. The authors
  review neuroscience evidence showing a "double dissociation" between language and
  cognition—demonstrating that complex thought can occur without language and that
  language properties are optimized for efficient information transfer rather than
  reasoning. They conclude that while language has transformed human culture and co-evolved
  with our cognitive abilities, it is not a prerequisite for sophisticated thinking
  but rather a powerful mechanism for transmitting cultural knowledge.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Language is primarily a tool for communication rather than thought

Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 575 Perspective Language is primarily a tool for communication rather than thought Evelina Fedorenko1,2 ✉, Steven T. Piantadosi3 & Edward A. F. Gibson1 Language is a deﬁning characteristic of our species, but the function, or functions, that it serves has been debated for centuries. Here we bring recent evidence from neuroscience and allied disciplines to argue that in modern humans, language is a tool for communication, contrary to a prominent view that we use language for thinking. We begin by introducing the brain network that supports linguistic ability in humans. We then review evidence for a double dissociation between language and thought, and discuss several properties of language that suggest that it is optimized for communication. We conclude that although the emergence of language has unquestionably transformed human culture, language does not appear to be a prerequisite for complex thought, including symbolic thought. Instead, language is a powerful tool for the transmission of cultural knowledge; it plausibly co-evolved with our thinking and reasoning capacities, and only reﬂects, rather than gives rise to, the signature sophistication of human cognition. Language is estimated to have emerged in humans between 100,000 and 1,000,000 years ago1. The functions of language and the causal drivers in its origins have long been fiercely debated across diverse fields, including philosophy, linguistics, cognitive science, evolutionary biology and anthropology. Two broad hypotheses have dominated this discussion, although they are not mutually exclusive. One proposal is that language primarily serves a communicative function—it enables us to share knowledge, thoughts, and feelings with one another2–7. Another proposal is that language mediates thinking and cognition8–13. The specific hypotheses about the role of language in thinking have ranged from strong claims that language is necessary for all forms of (at least propositional) thought14,15, to weaker claims that language may only be critical for, or can facilitate, certain aspects of thinking and reasoning9,16, and claims that language helps scaffold certain kinds of learning during development but may no longer be needed in mature brains12,17,18 (Box 1). From an evolutionary fitness standpoint, both the communicative and the cognitive functions of language could provide adaptive advan- tages. An ability to accurately transmit information would plausibly facilitate cooperative behaviours such as hunting, scavenging and long-distance travel, and enable passing of knowledge and skills to off- spring (cultural transmission). An improved reasoning capacity would plausibly enable more sophisticated planning and decision making, creation of better tools and better problem-solving abilities. However, hypotheses about the evolutionary origins of cognitive traits are notori- ously challenging to evaluate19. The primary evidence about the lives of early hominins comes from sparse archaeological records. Brains do not fossilize, and even if they did, only coarse information about brain function could be gleaned from brain size, shape and anatomy. Moreover, certain traits may evolve for one reason but subsequently serve a different function owing to changes in the species’ ecology: a phenomenon known as exaptation20. As a result of these challenges, we do not aspire to make strong claims about the evolutionary origins of language. We do, however, make an argument about the function of language in modern humans and discuss optimization pressures that have shaped language. At least some variants of both the language-for-thought and the language-for-communication proposals make testable predictions about human cognitive and neural architecture and about the proper- ties of human languages. Do any forms of thought—our knowledge of the world and ability to reason over these knowledge representations— require language (that is, representations and computations that sup- port our ability to generate and interpret meaningfully structured word sequences)? If some forms of thought require language, then linguistic mechanisms should be obligatorily engaged for at least those types of thinking and reasoning, and those types of thought should not be pos- sible without language. If language is a tool for communication, then language should show hallmarks of efficient information transfer. Until recently, these predictions have been difficult to evaluate. However, over the past two decades, knowledge and tools have become available that have shed critical light on the function of language. First, substan- tial advances have been made in deciphering the neural architecture of language, providing a clear ‘target’ for evaluating the engagement of language-processing mechanisms during various forms of thought. Second, massive corpora of diverse languages have become widely available, along with a suite of powerful computational tools, often based on information theory21, for rigorously characterizing linguistic systems. As a result, the time is now ripe to take stock of current evi- dence on the big and important questions of the function of language and its role in human cognition. The language network in the human brain Our knowledge of language encompasses knowledge of regularities at all levels of linguistic structure, from sounds to sentences, and a https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07522-w Received: 15 February 2023 Accepted: 3 May 2024 Published online: 19 June 2024 Check for updates 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Speech and Hearing in Bioscience and Technology Program at Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA. 3University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA. ✉e-mail: evelina9@mit.edu 576 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 Perspective large set of form–meaning mappings22,23 (meanings of morphemes, words and constructions). Using this knowledge, we can both convey our thoughts to others and infer others’ intended meanings from their utterances. Language production and language understanding are sup- ported by an interconnected set of brain areas in the left hemisphere, often referred to as the ‘language network’24–27 (recently reviewed in ref. 28) (Fig. 1a; Box 2 describes its relationship to the ‘classic model’ of the neurobiology of language). Two properties of the language network are important for the discus- sion of the function(s) of language. First, the language areas exhibit independence of input and output modalities—key signatures of rep- resentational abstractness. First, during comprehension, these brain areas respond to linguistic input across modalities (spoken, written or signed29–32). Similarly, during language generation, these areas are active regardless of whether we produce our messages by speaking or writing33. The fact that these areas support both comprehension and production33,34 (Fig. 1a) suggests that they are likely to store our linguis- tic knowledge, which is needed to both encode and decode linguistic messages. The abstractness of the language network’s representations suggests that this network corresponds to what Hauser, Chomsky and Fitch, in an influential piece on language evolution35, referred to as “the faculty of language in the narrow sense” or an “abstract computational system” that is separate from lower-level speech perception and speech articulation mechanisms (Box 2). Second, the language areas represent and process both word meanings and syntactic structure—two components of language that are important to the language-for-thought hypotheses (Box 1). In par- ticular, evidence from diverse experimental and naturalistic paradigms in functional MRI (fMRI), magnetoencephalography and intracranial recording studies has revealed that all areas of the language network are sensitive to word meanings and to inter-word syntactic and semantic dependencies33,36–48 (Fig. 1a). Together, the abstractness of the linguistic representations in the language network and the sensitivity of the network to linguistic mean- ing and structure make it a clear target for evaluating hypotheses about the role of language in thought and cognition (Box 3). Language is not necessary or sufficient for thought The ontology of human cognition and the nature of mental represen- tations that mediate thought (Box 3) remain active areas of research. Broadly, thought encompasses our knowledge of the world (includ- ing particular domains, such as knowledge of the physical properties of objects or knowledge of social agents) and reasoning over these knowledge representations, which includes making inferences and pre- dictions. Aside from reasoning about particular knowledge domains, reasoning can involve cross-domain integration of information (an important ingredient of analogical reasoning49) or be domain-general, abstracted away from any particular domain. Domain-general rea- soning is often linked to the notion of fluid intelligence50. Because language-for-thought hypotheses vary in what aspects of thought or cognition language is supposed to be critical or helpful for (Box 1) and our goal is to evaluate this idea broadly, we discuss evidence from diverse paradigms that engage thinking and reasoning. Moreover, empirically, all aspects of thought tested so far behave similarly with respect to their recruitment of linguistic resources. Box 1 Many flavours of the language-for-thought hypothesis A comprehensive review of prior claims about the role of language in thinking is outside the scope of this Perspective (for reviews, see for example9,10,12,16,71,178–182). However, we emphasize the diversity of perspectives on this issue and the complexity of the theoretical landscape. Proposals about the role of language in thinking vary along at least four dimensions (sample quotes and reasons why the idea that we use language to think appeals to many are presented in the Supplementary Information). First, proposals vary in the scope of the effects of language on thought: from claims that all of thought (at least all propositional thought) requires linguistic representations to claims that only certain kinds of thinking do. The second dimension concerns the degree of importance of language for thought, from claims that linguistic representations are necessary for thinking (such that without access to these representations, thinking is not possible) to claims that they only augment or facilitate thinking (that is, enable faster and/or more accurate performance on some target thinking task). The third dimension has to do with the nature of linguistic representations that are at play. Some proposals emphasize features that are common to all natural languages, including words and syntactic structure. Other proposals instead focus on features that are specific to particular languages— for instance, whether a language has a word for a particular concept or marks a particular grammatical distinction (Supplementary Information). Finally, proposals vary as to the timing of the effects of language on thought, with some proposals arguing that linguistic representations are necessary or helpful for the development of thinking abilities, and others arguing that linguistic representations continue to be important for thinking even in fully mature brains. Stronger claims, such as accounts whereby all forms of thought require linguistic representations, are of course the easiest to falsify. For accounts whereby only certain kinds of thought require linguistic representations, it is critical to clearly define the scope of the relevant kinds of thought—and ideally, to suggest particular paradigms that engage those forms of thinking—to render the hypotheses empirically testable. In cases where specific proposals have been articulated (for example, in refs. 9,72,74), they have not found empirical support in neuroscientific investigations, and some of the behavioural effects cannot be unambiguously attributed to the language network for example, ref. 70). Indeed, as discussed in this Perspective, at least for mature brains, there is at present no unequivocal empirical support for any form of thinking requiring linguistic representations (words or syntactic structures). Similarly, for accounts whereby linguistic representations facilitate thinking, it is critical to delineate the conditions under which such effects should be observed and to describe their nature and—ideally—putative neural mechanisms. Current bodies of evidence for potential facilitative effects of language on thinking and potential roles of language in the development of certain cognitive capacities are complex and controversial (further details in Supplementary Information). It seems clear that we can use language to compress analogue signals into symbolic representations (for example, reducing a visual array of nine objects to ‘nine’183; see ref. 173 for a recent proposal on the role of information compression in human thinking). However, these representations need not be specifically linguistic: they could be symbolic but non-linguistic (for example, ‘9’), and the use of symbolic non-linguistic representations does not engage linguistic resources (for example, mathematical reasoning elicits no response in the language brain areas and is preserved in individuals with severe aphasia51,77–79). Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 577 If language mediates some forms of thought, then those forms of thought should not be possible in the absence of language because they should critically depend on linguistic representations (the ‘necessity of language for thought’ argument). Moreover, the presence of language (or an intact linguistic ability) should be associated with the capacity for those forms of thought (the ‘sufficiency of language for thought’ argument). We discuss these points in turn. Language is not necessary for any tested forms of thought The classical approach for making inferences about brain–behaviour associations and dissociations is to examine individuals with brain damage or disorders. If linguistic ability mediates our ability to engage in certain forms of thought, then linguistic impairments should be associated with concomitant difficulties in those aspects of thinking Language network Language network Level of neural response Understanding or producing sentences Understanding or producing lists of words Processing or producing lists of nonwords Understanding language (by listening or reading) Producing language (by speaking or writing) Task: say out loud Some networks that support thinking and reasoning Multiple demand network Multiple demand network Theory of mind network Theory of mind network a b A girl is playing in the sand a ﬂower a snowman a dog u blunker o stowlaf e bul u blunker o stowlaf e bul Target: a ﬂower, a snowman, a dog Task: describe the picture Task: name the pictures Sample language networks in individual brains Responses in the language areas Interpretation: sensitivity to sentence structure Interpretation: sensitivity to word meanings Target: A girl is playing in the sand > > > > Mathematics Some forms of reasoning Computer code comprehension Executive functions Supported functions: Novel problem solving Supported functions: Language comprehension Language production Social reasoning Mentalizing Supported functions: Fig. 1 | The language network and its relationship to other cognitive networks. a, The language network in the human brain. The language network supports computations that are related to lexical access and syntactic structure building during both comprehension and production across modalities, which suggests that the representations that this network operates over are abstract. Given that access to words and syntactic structures has been argued to be critical for aspects of thinking, this brain network is a clear target for evaluating language-for-thought proposals. Top left, the language network in five sample individuals. These activation maps were obtained with fMRI using a language localizer paradigm, which contrasts language processing and a perceptually similar control condition30. The brain areas in these maps show more neural activity during the critical, language-processing condition compared with the control condition. Bottom left, a schematic representation of the response profile of the language network (for example, as measured by fMRI) to understanding or producing sentences, lists of unconnected words and lists of nonwords30,33,36,40,47. A stronger response to sentences than word lists is generally taken to suggest engagement of a brain region in combinatorial (syntactic and semantic) computations, a requirement for processing sentences but not lists of words; a stronger response to word lists than nonword lists is taken to suggest the engagement of a brain region in accessing word meanings, a requirement for processing real words but not nonwords. Right, sample stimuli used in brain imaging experiments to investigate responses to sentences, lists of words and lists of nonwords in comprehension (top row) versus production (bottom row). b, Language and thought are dissociated in the human brain. Left, a schematic representation of the response profile of the language network (for example, as measured by fMRI). This network responds strongly to language comprehension and production, but not to non-linguistic tasks that require thinking and reasoning (fer example, ref. 77). The core regions of the language network are shown schematically in red on a brain template (sample individual activation maps are shown in a). Right, schematic representation of the response profiles of two networks that support thinking and reasoning (for example, as measured by fMRI). The multiple demand network (shown schematically in blue on a brain template) responds to diverse demanding cognitive tasks, including executive function tasks, novel problem-solving tasks, and mathematical and logical reasoning, but not to language or social reasoning (for example, ref. 76). The theory of mind network (shown schematically in green on a brain template) responds during social reasoning, but not to language or demanding executive function tasks (for example, ref. 86). 578 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 Perspective and reasoning. The evidence is unequivocal—there are many cases of individuals with severe linguistic impairments, affecting both lexi- cal and syntactic abilities, who nevertheless exhibit intact abilities to engage in many forms of thought—they can solve mathematical problems51,52, perform executive planning and follow non-verbal instructions53, engage in diverse forms of reasoning, including for- mal logical reasoning, causal reasoning about the world and scientific reasoning54–58, to understand what another person believes or thinks and perform pragmatic inference53,56,59–62, to navigate in the world63, and to make semantic judgements about objects and events64–70 (Fig. 1b). Box 2 From the classic model of the neurobiology of language to where we are now Many textbooks continue to use the classic model of the neural basis of language, which was proposed by Wernicke184 and elaborated and revised by Lichteim and Geschwind24,185. This model consists of two cortical areas—Broca’s area in the inferior frontal cortex and Wernicke’s area in the posterior superior temporal cortex—which are argued to support language production and comprehension, respectively, and which are connected by a dorsal fibre bundle (the arcuate fasciculus) (panel a). This model has received criticism over the years27,186,187—but, although incomplete, the classic model correctly captures key aspects of the neurobiology of language. We believe that much of the confusion about Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas has resulted from frequent conflation of speech (the form of spoken language) and language (the abstract system of form-to-meaning mappings) in experimental designs and scientific discourse, and predominant reliance in human cognitive neuroscience on anatomical rather than functional definitions of brain areas. As described in the original sources, the brain areas that were discovered by Broca and Wernicke support speech motor (articulatory) planning and speech perception, respectively. Current neuroscientific evidence strongly supports the existence of an articulation-selective area in the inferior frontal cortex188–192 (panel b, red) and of an area selective for speech perception in the superior temporal gyrus193–197 (panel b, blue). In contrast to the language network areas, these areas are not sensitive to linguistic meaning, only to the surface properties of linguistic signals28. Adding function into these areas’ names (for example, ‘Broca’s articulatory planning area’ and ‘Wernicke’s speech perception area’) and using validated ‘localizer’ paradigms to separate these areas from nearby functionally distinct areas is likely to lead to progress and alleviate confusion28. Absent from the classic model are the ‘higher-level language areas’, which store abstract linguistic knowledge and support comprehension and production, as discussed in ‘The language network in the human brain’ (Fig. 1a and panel b, purple). There is a straightforward explanation for the absence of these areas from the early proposals of the neurobiology of language. The early evidence about brain–behaviour relationships came from reports of selective deficits following brain damage. Because Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas are relatively circumscribed and specialized for particular functions, their damage is more likely to lead to deficits (given that no other brain areas support these functions). By contrast, the higher-level language network is distributed across extensive portions of the left temporal and frontal cortex (Fig. 1a and panel b, purple), with different language regions exhibiting similar functional profiles28 (alternative proposals are described in refs. 27,198,199). As a result, in contrast to speech articulation and speech perception areas, no individual part of the high-level language network may be critically needed for linguistic function. Indeed, circumscribed lesions to the language network do not lead to severe or long-lasting deficits, although the posterior temporal component, which is adjacent to the speech perception area, may be relatively more important200. Classic and current models. | a, The classic model of the neurobiology of language. b, A model based on the current knowledge of neurobiology of language (alternative proposals are described in refs. 27,198,199). This updated model still includes Broca’s (articulatory planning) area188–192 and Wernicke’s (speech perception) area193–197, but additionally includes a set of frontal and temporal areas that jointly support high-level language comprehension and production28 (also see Fig. 1a). For context, we also show primary auditory cortex, which is likely to provide input to Wernicke’s (speech perception) area, and sensorimotor cortex, to which Broca’s (articulatory planning) area is likely to provide input189,190. Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 579 Importantly, in these studies, researchers carefully and systematically assessed the individuals’ linguistic abilities to ensure that the deficit concerns linguistic ability, including lexical and syntactic processing, and not the lower-level perceptual or motor abilities71. This body of evidence challenges both general claims about the importance of language for thought (Box 1), and a number of specific proposals about the critical role of language in particular kinds of think- ing, including mathematical reasoning72, cross-domain information integration9,73 and categorization74. Despite losing their linguistic ability, some individuals with severe aphasia are able to perform all tested forms of thinking and reasoning, as evidenced by their intact performance on diverse cognitive tasks. They simply cannot map those thoughts onto linguistic expressions, either in language production (they cannot convey their thoughts to others through language) or in understanding (they cannot extract meaning from others’ words and sentences) (Fig. 1b). Of course, in some cases of brain damage, both linguistic and (some) thinking abilities may be affected, but this is to be expected given the proximity of the language system to other high-level cognitive systems75,76. Neuroimaging evidence complements the evidence from individu- als with brain damage. Using tools such as fMRI, we can identify the language areas in intact, healthy brains and then examine the response in those areas while individuals engage in tasks that require different forms of thought. In ‘The language network in the human brain’, we defined a clear target for evaluating such hypotheses: the language network, a set of brain areas that are ubiquitously engaged when we understand and produce language28 (Fig. 1a). Responses in this network to diverse non-linguistic inputs and tasks have been exam- ined, and the evidence demonstrates that all regions of the lan- guage network are largely ‘silent’ during all tested forms of thought, including mathematical reasoning77–79, formal logical reasoning80,81, performing demanding executive function tasks such as working memory or cognitive control tasks77, understanding computer code82,83, thinking about others’ mental states84–86, and making semantic judgments about objects or events69,70,87. Instead, these tasks engage other brain areas that are non-overlapping with the language network (Fig. 1b), although they sometimes lie in close proximity to the language areas75,76. It remains possible that future work will uncover some thinking tasks that will engage language areas and that will prove challenging for patients with aphasia, but no such tasks have been found so far. Some language-for-thought hypotheses specifically concern cogni- tive development (Box 1). According to these hypotheses, language (or, in some accounts, symbolic representations more generally) may be critical for the development of certain kinds or ways of think- ing12,17,18,88,89. Some support for this idea comes from studies in which teaching children or non-human primates words or symbols for certain concepts (for example, the concept ‘same’) or assigning labels in a way that highlights the task-relevant dimension of the world (for example, drawing attention to object size by labelling a bigger object ‘daddy’ and a smaller one ‘baby’) can lead to success on certain relational reason- ing tasks18. Others have argued that training young children on certain syntactic constructions (for example, complement clauses) can result in their ability to pass theory of mind tasks17,90,91. However, reasons for skepticism exist. First, recent evidence suggests that the dissociation between the language network and systems that support thinking and reasoning is already present in young children92,93 (Box 3), which con- tradicts the possibility that at an early developmental stage thinking relies on linguistic resources. And second, some children growing up with no access to language can nevertheless reason in complex ways. In particular, some deaf children who are born to hearing parents grow up with little or no exposure to language, sometimes for years, because they cannot hear speech and their parents or caregivers do not know sign language. Lack of access to language has harmful conse- quences for many aspects of cognition94,95, which is to be expected given that language provides a critical source of information for learning about the world96,97. Nevertheless, individuals who experience language deprivation unquestionably exhibit a capacity for complex cognitive function: they can still learn to do mathematics, to engage in relational reasoning, to build causal chains, and to acquire rich and sophisticated knowledge of the world98,99 (also see ref. 100 for more controversial evidence from language deprivation in a case of child abuse). In other words, lack of access to linguistic representations does not make it fundamentally impossible to engage in complex—including symbolic— thought, although some aspects of reasoning do show delays101,102. Thus, it appears that in typical development, language and reasoning develop in parallel (see ‘Communication and thought in humans and animals’ for concordant evidence from brain evolution). Finally, it is worth mentioning that pre-verbal infants103 and many animal species—including non-human primates104–108, corvids109,110, elephants111 and cephalopods112,113—exhibit impressive inferential and problem-solving abilities, apparently without language, further bring- ing into question the necessity of language or a language-like system for complex thinking114,115. Intact language does not imply intact thought The evidence discussed above suggests that all types of thought tested to date are possible without language. Next, we discuss the other side of the double dissociation between language and thought: contrary to the view that language mediates thinking, an intact language system does not appear to entail intact reasoning abilities. Evidence from both Box 3 Open questions Our understanding of human linguistic and cognitive capacities and the relationships between them remains incomplete. Here we highlight a few open questions. (1) What is the nature of linguistic representations that the language-selective brain network stores and the computations that it performs during comprehension and production? Recent advances in artificial intelligence—the development of neural network models that excel at language201—have provided language researchers with a suite of powerful tools to probe the neural codes of linguistic processing48,202–205 (reviewed in ref. 206). These tools, combined with the increasing sophistication of neural recording approaches207,208, should enable advances in our understanding of the human language system in the coming years. (2) Does our thinking rely on symbolic representations209–212, sub-symbolic or connectionist representations213,214, or some combination of these? How do representations that mediate abstract thought arise from the biological neural networks that are our brains215,216? Are any thought-related computations and the underlying neural circuits distinctly human, or do humans simply have more neural and cognitive resources163,173 that lead to greater sophistication? (3) How does the language network develop as children learn language? What cognitive functions do brain areas that are selective for language by age four92,93 support before language is acquired? Although a number of studies have investigated responses to speech in newborn and infant brains217–219, the functional changes that happen in the brain during the second half of the first year of life and during toddlerhood (age 6 months to 3 years), when children begin to link words to meanings and to use language communicatively, remain unknown because experimentation with spatially precise brain imaging approaches such as fMRI is challenging at this age. 580 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 Perspective developmental and acquired brain disorders suggests that intellectual impairments can be present even when linguistic abilities are largely intact. For example, several genetic disorders are characterized by varying degrees of intellectual disability (Down syndrome and Williams syndrome, among others), yet the linguistic abilities of people with these disorders appear to be close to typical. Even if subtle linguistic deficits are observed, the foundational capacities for processing word meanings and linguistic structure building—the capacities that figure in the language-for-thought hypotheses—are intact116–118. Some neu- ropsychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, affect the ability to think and reason, but again spare language119. Finally, many individuals with acquired brain damage exhibit difficulties in reasoning and problem solving but appear to have full command of their linguistic abilities58. In other words, having an intact language system does not bring with it ‘for free’ an ability to think: thinking capacities can be impaired in the presence of intact language (see ref. 120 for related arguments from large language models). Language is an efficient communication code Having reviewed the evidence against the role of language in thought, we next discuss evidence that communicative forces have shaped the form that language takes2–7. An efficient communication code should be easy to produce and understand, while being robust to noise21 (envi- ronmental or resulting from imperfect processing mechanisms), and it must be learnable by people. As we discuss next, human languages— both spoken and signed—exhibit all these properties, and these prop- erties manifest at all levels of linguistic structure, including sounds, words and syntax. We acknowledge that some of these properties are not uniquely predicted by the language-for-communication view. However, the supposed absence of communicative features of language has long been used by some advocates of the language-for-thought hypoth- esis as evidence against the communicative function of language121, so it is important to summarize the now abundant evidence for 5 10 c Japanese Persian 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 50 100 150 0 50 100 150 Sentence length Dependency length ‘Alfred said that Zoe gave pizza to monkeys who wanted bananas.’ Japanese (subject–object–verb) word order: dependency lengths = 15 Verb after objects, adpositions after object nouns (postpositions) English (subject–verb–object) word order: dependency lengths = 13 Verb before objects, adpositions before object nouns (prepositions) a b General N Information loss English Arabic Complexity SG/PL SG/DUO/TRO/PL Zoe Zoe Zoe Zoe gave gave gave gave that that that Alfred Alfred said said that Alfred said said to to to to pizza pizza pizza pizza who who who who bananas bananas bananas bananas wanted wanted wanted wanted monkeys monkeys monkeys monkeys 0 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.5 1.5 1.0 SG/DU/PAUC/GPAUC/PL SG/DU/PAUC/PL Name Name Name Name Name Name Name Name VComp VComp VComp VComp Comp Comp Comp Comp VN, Prep VN, Prep VN, Prep VN, Prep VN VN VN VN Prep Prep Prep Prep Wh-pro Wh-pro Wh-pro Wh-pro N N N N N N N N N N N N Comp Comp Comp Comp SComp SComp SComp SComp Root Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Subj Mod Mod Mod Mod Mod Mod Mod Mod Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Obj Root Root Root Ind-Obj Ind-Obj Ind-Obj Ind-Obj Verb after objects, prepositions Dependency lengths = 22 Verb before objects, postpositions Dependency lengths = 20 Alfred Fig. 2 | See next page for caption. Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 | 581 the robust presence of these features cross-linguistically. Moreo- ver, some of the communicative features are difficult to explain under the view that language is used primarily for internal thought. Starting from the lowest level of linguistic structure, the sounds of a language are spread out in phonetic space122,123, which enables them to carry information in a way that is robust to corruption from noise and facilitates perception and comprehension. Sound repertoires of languages appear to also be shaped by factors that affect articulatory ease for different sound classes, including physical environments124 and diet-related changes in the anatomy of the articulatory apparatus125. With respect to word forms, languages preferentially re-use short and efficient words and within-word sound sequences126. Moreover, frequent and low-information words tend to be short127. These proper- ties enable ease of word retrieval in production and comprehension (frequent words are easier to access from memory) and for articulatory ease (short words are less energy-costly, and repeated sound sequences can be stored as chunks in motor memory, reducing articulatory plan- ning costs128). In terms of word meanings, words optimize communicative effi- ciency through a trade-off between complexity (the cost of acquiring or representing the meanings) and informativeness (how precisely and unambiguously the words select their meanings). One example is kin- ship terms129: languages choose different solutions along the optimal frontier defined by the trade-off between having simple versus informa- tive meanings (for example, words that pick out unique members of a family tree, such ‘maternal grandmother’). The efficiency that charac- terizes natural languages means that it is typically not possible to make a real language’s kinship system much simpler without having it convey less information, or vice versa. Similar results have been reported for colour terms130,131 and season words132, and closed-class words and gram- matical markers133–136 (Fig. 2a). Lexical systems also show hallmarks of adaptation to specific communicative needs, more densely covering the parts of a conceptual space that a given community needs137,138. Syntax is the component of language that has been the most con- troversial in the discussions about whether languages are optimized for efficient communication. Syntax specifies how words combine to enable the expression of a vast number of meanings—the ‘infinite use of finite means’139. The defining properties of syntax—hierarchy and composition—are probably the result of the very same pressures mentioned in the context of word meanings above: the pressure for simplicity (critical for learnability) and the pressure for expressiveness (critical for effective communication)5,140–142. Moreover, various syntactic patterns in the world’s languages can also be explained by combining communicative and cognitive pres- sures. A prime example is the tendency of languages to minimize the lengths of dependencies between words. In any given sentence, words are assembled—according to the rules of the grammar—to form a larger meaning. For example, the sentence ‘Lana ate five apples’, has a dependency between ‘five’ and ‘apples’, but there is no link between ‘Lana’ and ‘five’ because those words are not directly related in the meaning. Longer-distance connections (connections with more inter- vening words) increase difficulty of production and comprehension, as measured behaviourally143,144 or with brain imaging39,45. Plausibly owing to this cognitive cost, languages have evolved to become more efficient for processing—that is, use—by minimizing dependency lengths145,146 (Fig. 2b,c). This functional pressure in a grammar to keep dependencies local explains several universal tendencies in word orders147,148. Other examples concern the order of basic elements—the subject (the agent, roughly), verb and object (the patient of the action, roughly)— within a sentence to convey complex meanings. The subject–object– verb order, which is the most common across the world’s languages (approximately 47% of languages—for example, Japanese, Persian and Hindi), appears to be a cognitively natural default: speakers of diverse languages use this order when gesturing event meanings149, and emergent sign languages have this order150,151. Gibson et al.152 have further offered a communicative explanation for the shift of some languages from the default (subject–object–verb) order to the sec- ond most common order, subject–verb–object (approximately 41% of languages—for example, English, Ukrainian and Mandarin). In particular, in the subject–verb–object order, the listener can use positional cues— whether a given noun appears before or after the verb—to reconstruct who is doing what to whom in the presence of information loss during communication153,154 (refs. 155–157 describe other word-order gener- alizations that follow from similar pressures). One common argument against the idea that language has evolved as a communication system is the prevalence of ambiguity: most words have multiple meanings, and many (especially longer) sentences have many possible dependency structures. Chomsky, for instance, has long argued that the existence of ambiguity implies that language is used primarily for thought rather than communication, because Fig. 2 | Human languages are shaped by communicative pressures. a, Words across many semantic domains trade-off between complexity and informativeness. This pattern is as predicted for efficient communication systems (here, shown for the domain of grammatical number markers135). Attested inventories (black dots; sizes correspond to the number of languages with a given inventory (N)) and unattested systems (grey dots) are plotted in the space of all possible grammatical systems. Systems that achieve optimal trade-offs lie along the Pareto frontier (solid line); the shaded region below the line shows trade-offs that are impossible to achieve. DU, dual; GPAUC, greater paucal (a bunch); PAUC, paucal (a few); PL, plural; SG, singular; TR, trial. Optional values are shown with the subscript ‘o’. b, Languages minimize syntactic dependency lengths cross-linguistically146. Observed average dependency lengths (black lines in each graph) for sentences of 1 to 50 words across four typologically diverse languages, based on analyses of large language corpora. For each sentence in the corpus, a single value was computed by summing the lengths of all dependencies as shown in c. The red dashed line shows a random baseline created by first scrambling the words, preserving the hierarchical dependency structure and disallowing crossing dependencies, and then recomputing dependency lengths146. All lines are fitted using a generalized additive model. Across languages (ref. 146 for data from 37 languages), the observed dependency lengths fall below the random baseline, suggesting that languages evolve to make dependencies shorter, presumably to facilitate production and comprehension. c, Examples of minimization of syntactic dependency lengths in different languages. Top row, syntactic dependency structure for a subject–verb–object word order language (for example, English). Verbs appear before object nouns; prepositions appear before object nouns. Here and in the other examples, the syntactic category of a word is shown under each word and the relationships between words are shown with directed arcs; the type of the relationship is marked above each arc. The total dependency length of a sentence is the sum of all dependency distances—for example, the dependency between ‘Alfred’ and ‘said’ is 1; for dependencies between non- adjacent words, the dependency length is the number of intervening words plus 1. For this sentence, there are 7 local dependencies of length 1 and 3 dependencies of length 2, for a total sentence dependency length of 7 + 6 = 13. Second row, syntactic dependency structure for a subject–object–verb word order language (for example, Japanese). Verbs appear after object nouns; prepositions (postpositions) appear after object nouns. Two word orders that rarely occur in natural languages, putatively because they introduce long- distance dependencies: in the third row, verbs appear after object nouns, and prepositions appear before object nouns; in the fourth row, verbs appear before object nouns, and prepositions (postpositions) appear after object nouns. Comp, complementizer; Ind-Obj, indirect object; Mod, modifier; N, noun; Obj, object; root, the root of the sentence; SComp, sentence complement; Subj, subject; VComp, verb taking a complementizer argument; VN, verb taking a noun argument; VN, Prep, verb taking a noun and a preposition argument; Prep, preposition; Wh-pro, wh-pronoun (for example, ‘who’). 582 | Nature | Vol 630 | 20 June 2024 Perspective ambiguous signals would impede communication121. However, the existence of ambiguity in human language is actually not expected under the language-for-thought view, given that our thoughts do not seem ambiguous. By contrast, the existence of ambiguity in language is a natural prediction of communicative accounts of language. That is, ambiguity can be mathematically shown to be communicatively useful: not only does it allow speakers to leave out information that listeners already know (for example, from the context), but it enables the re-use of short, easy-to-produce linguistic forms158. A system that allows no ambiguity would require a much bigger lexicon and grammar than those of human linguistic systems, and such a system would need to use long words and sentences to convey even simple meanings. For example, an artificial language that was constructed to remove ambi- guity159 proved to be so complicated as to be unlearnable by humans and has been undergoing rounds of revision to allow for learnability. Moreover, the existence of words with multiple related senses (such as ‘water’ used as a drink and as a verb) has been argued to support learning, since acquisition of one meaning will help with acquisition of a related one160. In this way, the capacity for multiple form–meaning mappings is likely to be useful for maintaining a rich lexicon. We acknowledge that some of these properties of human languages may also have non-communicative explanations. For example, compo- sitionality in language may simply reflect pre-existing compositionality in thought, or even in lower-level, perceptual and motor systems161— although this idea is still contrary to the language-for-thought hypoth- esis, as the directionality is reversed. Communication and thought in humans and animals Across species, interactions with conspecifics require a communication system—that is, mechanisms for perceiving and emitting signals and a store of signal-to-meaning associations. The communication system of humans is unquestionably complex, but did language endow us with a new form of reasoning (Box 1), or does language simply reflect the independent sophistication of human thoughts? In this Perspective, building on prior theorizing and bringing in evidence from the past two decades, we have argued that language appears to not be neces- sary for any forms of thought tested so far, and that language is not sufficient for thought. Furthermore, on the basis of the evidence that many features of natural languages appear to be optimized for efficient information transfer, we have argued for communication being the primary function of language. The view that language is simply a communication system aligns with a continuity view of human evolution162,163. In this view, the prop- erties of human language—including its complexity—may result from the multifaceted landscape in which it has evolved, where the system must be useful (able to express the internal contents of the human mind) and learnable, and humans should be able to process language with the idiosyncratic strengths and limitations of pre-existing cogni- tive and neural systems. The contrasting alternative—that language is the substrate for thinking—implies a sharp discontinuity between our species and others. This alternative view centres language— perhaps innately—as the mechanism of change, and the mechanism that endowed humans with a novel representational format for mental computations. Why does an intimate relationship between language and thought have an intuitive appeal to many? Some are attached to the idea that humans are superior in the animal kingdom (that is, they differ quali- tatively, not just quantitatively, from other animals164), even though scientific evidence suggests strong biological similarities between humans and non-human animals165,166. Another reason may be linked to the desire for parsimony in explaining differences between humans and non-human animals (additional reasons are provided in Supple- mentary Information). In particular, humans differ from other animals in the sophistication of their communication system as well as their thoughts and cognition. A parsimonious account favours a single-factor explanation—for instance, humans evolved language, and the change in cognition was simply a consequence of this. However, evidence from human brain evolution instead suggests parallel increases in the sophis- tication of multiple cognitive systems. Relative to the brains of other animals, including non-human pri- mates, the association cortex—which houses mental processes above and beyond perception and motor control—has expanded substan- tially and disproportionately in the human brain167. The association cortex spans frontal, temporal and parietal lobes and, in humans, com- prises multiple large-scale networks—ensembles of brain areas that jointly support some aspect of cognition75. The language network28 is just one of these networks. Significant progress has been made in characterizing several other networks that support human cogni- tive abilities, including those underlying the non-linguistic tasks discussed in ‘Language is not necessary or sufficient for thought’. For example, the network sometimes referred to as the ‘multiple demand’ network, supports diverse goal-directed behaviours, including novel problem solving, and damage of this network leads to impairments in fluid intelligence168 (Fig. 1b). Mathematical and logical reasoning and the processing of computer code also draw on the multiple demand network78–83. Other such networks include the ‘theory of mind’ net- work, which supports social reasoning, including mentalizing or thinking about others’ thoughts169 (Fig. 1b) and the ‘default’ network, whose functions remain debated, with some linking its regions to episodic projection into the past or future170 and others linking them to spatial cognition and reasoning171. At least some of the networks have homologues in non-human animal brains172—the correspond- ences in functional architecture across species is an ongoing effort in neuroscience. Importantly, however, multiple brain networks ha
