---
id: 143
url: https://cs.lmu.edu/~ray/notes/languagedesignnotes/
title: languagedesignnotes
domain: cs.lmu.edu
source_date: '2025-11-15'
tags:
- compilers
- tutorial
- academic-paper
summary: 'This page is a comprehensive guide to programming language design that outlines
  the iterative process of creating a language and the essential knowledge required.
  The author emphasizes that successful language designers need expertise in three
  areas: programming paradigms, programming language concepts, and existing languages,
  supplemented by study of classic papers and design principles. The guide then provides
  a practical checklist for getting started, including defining your target audience,
  determining the language''s philosophy (pragmatic vs. esoteric), and selecting foundational
  features that enable clear, readable code.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# languagedesignnotes

Language Design So, you want to design your own language? Of course you do. Or perhaps you are taking a class and are being forced to create a programming language under penalty of a bad grade. What kinds of things do you need to know? Designing a Language Of course you want to design (and implement!) your own programming language! It’s fun. It’s creative. It’s empowering. How do we do it? In a nutshell, the process is iterative, cycling between four phases: Doing the phases over and over is important; for example, while writing the compiler, you may be like “woah this is impossible” and then realize “oh shoot this part of the language wasn’t designed right!” Prerequisites It helps to be experienced. If you’re not, that’s okay, actually—you might get lucky! But don’t mistake creativity for luck that shows up without pre-existing knowledge. The most creative people are those with a lot of knowledge and experience. So you should still study and practice! Your success as a language designer will be massively aided by knowledge in three main areas: Programming Paradigms . You should know a number of different ways that computations can be structured. These include: imperative declarative structured object-oriented functional applicative concatenative logic protocol-oriented aspect-oriented array event-driven dataflow agent-based etc. See Wikipedia’s list of programming paradigms . Programming Language Concepts . You should have a good sense of most, if not all, of the following things: Sequencing, conditional execution, iteration, recursion, functional decomposition, modularity, synchronization, metaprogramming, binding, scope, extent, volatility, subtyping, pattern matching, type inference, closures, prototypes, introspection, instrumentation, annotations, decorators, memoization, traits, streams, monads, actors, mailboxes, comprehensions, continuations, wildcards, promises, regular expressions, proxies, transactional memory, inheritance, polymorphism, parameter modes, type classes, generics, reflection, concurrency, parallelism, distribution, persistence, transactions, garbage collection, and many more terms. I’m working on a glossary of such terms that may be helpful to review. Existing ProgrammingLanguages . It’s nice to have a feel for a variety of languages. Here are a few that are good to be familiar with (and the reasons why they are good to study): Python , for basic imperative programming and scripting Smalltalk , for OOP done beautifully JavaScript , for event-driven features, async, and promises Io , for ideas on building up everything from a minimal semantics Julia , for multiple dispatch Clojure , Racket , Scheme , and Common Lisp , for Lispiness (macros, etc.) Standard ML , OCaml , F# , and Elm , for Hindley-Milner typing and more Haskell , for typeclasses and functional purity eToys , Scratch , Snap! , and GP for the blocks approach Java and C# , for being enterprisey Kotlin , Ceylon , and Scala , as examples of evolving Java Erlang , Elixir , and Gleam , for expressing concurrent processes in a distributed fashion Fortran , Chapel , and Parasail , for expressing muticore and parallel programming TypeScript , PureScript , and ClojureScript , as examples of evolving JavaScript C , because it is the quintessential systems language C++ , Rust , Zig , Odin , and Mojo for making systems programming less painful and more secure Go and Swift , for more examples of modern, but generally mainline, ideas Verse , for massive concurrency in real-time multiplayer games in the metaverse J and K , for array programming Idris , for dependent typing Prolog and Mercury , for logic programming Forth and Factor , for concatenative programming Quipper , because it’s a language for quantum computing Brainfuck , Malbolge , LOLCODE , Whitespace , and other classic esoterics GolfScript , CJam , Pyth , Jelly , and other golfing languages, because this gives you a good sense of putting power into small syntactic constructs Piet and Hexagony , for, well, check them out.... Also check out this mini-encyclopedia of over 100 languages . Here are some excellent cross-language comparisons that help you to hone your understanding of how different syntaxes can express the same ideas: Syntax Across Languages Wikipedia Programming Language Comparisons Hyperpolyglot These are really good too: Showcase of Languages Languages Through the Years Getting Ready Remember, many people have designed languages before you. They made mistakes. They came up with brilliant ideas. Many were wildly successful. Some never made it big. Some people have brought in years of research on how people think and learn to come up with principles for language (and environment) design. You should learn form their experiences. Study classic papers. Read web essays. Visit online courses. Here is a small sampling of things to study and places to look for more information: Hints on Programming Language Design by Tony Hoare Learnable Programming by Bret Victor Five Questions about Language Design by Paul Graham For early classic papers, check out the massive bibliography of this paper Also look at the papers from Kathleen Fisher’s Programming Language Design class Think about the future: And understand that traditional, mainstream programming languages, are not at all the epitome of computational expression. Languages can be much more: Getting Started Ready to strike out on your own? Here are some things to think about, in the form of a, you guessed it, a checklist: Do you have a specific audience in mind? Artists? Graphic designers? AI researchers? Numeric and Scientific nerds? Natural language types? Game developers? Machine learning people? Animators? High performance folks? System programmers? Or do you want a general purpose language? Or do you just want to do what you want? Understand the audience that the language is designed for, and what kinds of things they want to create with it (or problems they want to solve with it). Determine if your language is to be (1) a reasonable, usable language or (2) an esoteric/joke/golfing language. Determine if it is to be pragmatic, idealistic, researchy, or evil. Determine whether you want your language firmly in one camp—OO, functional, logic, concatenative, plain-imperative—or be a multiparadigm symphony. Or a multiparadigm cacophony. Determine whether it is to be built on a single characteristic building block (a crystallization of style ) or one with a huge variety of syntactic forms for multiple semantic aspects (an agglutination of features ). Determine your concurrency model. Do you want all your programs to be single-threaded and sequential? Or are you looking for something event-driven and async? Or multithreaded? Or distributed? Choosing a Starter Set of Features Come up with a list of capabilities, or features. Make sure they enable programmers to express their creations by following the suggestions and principles in the Learnable Programming essay, including: Make meaning transparent Explain in context Make flow and time tangible and visible Show the data, and avoid hidden state Use metaphor Allow easy decomposition and recomposition Allow the programmer to write readable code—you do support mentioning parameter names in calls, right? Exercise : Skim the Learnable Programming essay. Or, better, read the whole thing if when you have time. What kind of questions might you have here? Here are some totally random ideas: If your language supports functions: Must you pass the exact number of arguments the function expects? Can you specify parameter names in the call? Do you have rest parameters? optional parameters? keyword parameters? default parameters? Are the parameters typed? Can parameters be modified? Are they passed by value, value-result, reference, name, etc? Are arguments evaluated L-R, R-L, in parallel, or in arbitrary order? How does a function return a value? Can it return zero or more values or just one? Are functions first-class? If so, do you use deep binding or shallow binding? Is recursion allowed? Can you test functions for equality? Can functions be anonymous? What is your type system like? Static vs. dynamic, strong vs. weak, manifest vs. implicit? Do you distinguish primitive types from reference types? Do you have all those different numeric types based on bit size? What about decimals and ratios? Do you have a separate character type? A separate boolean type? Can you get the type of an expression at runtime? Are types objects? Do you have supertypes and subtypes? Multiple-inheritance? If so, how do you handle name collisions? Are types the same as classes? Can you add new types? Do you have both sum and product types? Do functions have a type? Are there pointer types? Are there parameterized types? If so, are they (mostly) covariant, contravariant, or invariant? Any dependent types? What do your expressions look like? And does your runtime follow eager or lazy evaluation? Or both? Do you have only prefix, only postfix, only infix, or a wild mix of operators? Can you overload operators? If so, how? Can you change the precedence of operators? Even the built-in ones? At runtime? How much type inference do you have? Can you mark variables as mutable or immutable? Are your variables bound or assigned? Can they be assigned more than once? Do you have destructuring and/or pattern matching? How do you determine scope? Do you implicitly or explicitly import into inner scopes? Are there keywords that define access like public , private , and protected , or are there conventions, like in Go, where capitalized entities are implicitly exportable and lower-cased entities are private? Is there a let -expression for super-local scopes? Is shadowing allowed? Do you have anything like JavaScript’s this expression? How do you express control flow? Do you like expression-orientation or do you have real statements? How do you express sequential flow vs. nondeterministic flow vs. parallel flow? If you have nondeter
