---
id: 473
url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=43972425
title: 'Launch HN: Miyagi (YC W25) turns YouTube videos into online, interactive courses
  | Hacker News'
domain: news.ycombinator.com
source_date: '2025-05-13'
tags:
- ai
- tutorial
- web-dev
summary: Miyagi Labs (YC W25) is an AI-powered education platform that automatically
  transforms educational YouTube videos into interactive online courses by generating
  quizzes, practice problems, and personalized feedback. The founders aim to solve
  the "passive watching" problem of YouTube learning by converting video content into
  active learning experiences through their multi-step AI pipeline that processes
  transcripts into summaries, questions, and answers. The startup has already launched
  400+ courses featuring popular creators like 3Blue1Brown and offers revenue-sharing
  partnerships with content creators.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Launch HN: Miyagi (YC W25) turns YouTube videos into online, interactive courses | Hacker News

Hacker News new | past | comments | ask | show | jobs | submit login Launch HN: Miyagi (YC W25) turns YouTube videos into online, interactive courses 215 points by bestwillcui 8 months ago | hide | past | favorite | 120 comments Hey HN, we’re Tyrone and Guang, founders of Miyagi Labs ( https://miyagilabs.ai ), an AI-powered education platform that transforms educational YouTube videos into interactive courses. It helps you learn better through active practice and personalized feedback. We use LLMs to automatically generate quizzes, practice questions, and real-time feedback from any educational video or resource—turning passive watching into active learning. Here’s a short demo: https://youtu.be/alO7FaorHOY . Improving education has always been tricky. Bloom’s 2-sigma problem (showing that a high-quality personal tutor is far more effective than conventional methods) has persisted, even as technology has advanced. We met at MIT as CS majors and have always been passionate about education. Over the years, we’ve become teachers and experts in subjects like chess, algorithms, math, languages, and ninja warrior. A common theme was that we both heavily relied on YouTube to learn. YouTube has incredible content for learning pretty much anything, but it’s buried in a lot of distractions. Also, passively watching videos is far less effective than taking notes, asking questions, and doing practice problems, which is what we aim to do with Miyagi Labs. Our solution is essentially a multi-step function that takes in a YouTube playlist (or list of any resources) and outputs an entire course with summaries, questions, answers, and more. The pipeline is roughly: video/resource —> transcript/text —> chunks —> summary and question —> answers to questions, with some other features along the way. We mostly use prompting and different models at each step to make the course as useful as possible. Certain topics require more practice problems vs. comprehension, and we’d use reasoning models for highly technical subjects. We launched about three months ago and currently have 400+ courses and partnerships with some businesses and awesome creators. Some of our popular courses include 3Blue1Brown’s linear algebra course, a botany course on plants and ecology, and YC’s How to Start a Startup series. Our product resembles classical MOOC-style course platforms in terms of UI, but is more interactive. It’s really easy to ask a question or receive custom feedback compared to a static course on Coursera. It’s also comparable to AI tutor sites, but we try to build more of a community and require less activation energy as a learner. We’re basically betting that AI can hugely improve education, but that students still want to learn from their favorite creators and want baseline shared resources for standard topics that are then augmented with personalized features. You can try it here: https://miyagilabs.ai (no login required for most courses—but if you sign up you can also create your own course). We’d love your feedback on what kinds of videos/resources you’d like to learn from, what’s missing from current learning tools, and if you know any creators or educators who would like to collaborate. Happy to hear any feedback and answer any questions! vasusen 8 months ago | next [–] I was at Coursera for years and pitched this exact thing multiple times internally! So excited to finally see it being built. Congratulations on the launch! This concept is really cool and solves big challenges around content creation. Obviously, it adds new challenges around pedagogy, licensing, and ads. The last part is a big no no for blue chip edtech platforms. bestwillcui 8 months ago | parent | next [–] Thanks! We'd love to chat if you have any ideas or want to share your experience, we think Coursera is great. And yea totally understand the blue chip edtech thing, we're pretty excited to be a startup in this space. vasusen 8 months ago | root | parent | next [–] Happy to help and chat if it helps --> my username at donobu dot com EcommerceFlow 8 months ago | prev | next [–] Really cool idea! Some improvements I'd recommend with the ultimate goal being "getting users to learn the subject at hand". 1) Section Lectures on the left side need to be cleaned up, instead of just a numbered list. Seeing 30+ lectures off rip is a bit daunting, especially with no labeling, sectioning, etc. I'd imagine feeding a model a list of all the lecture titles, then having it structured should work? 2) You're doing too much on the bottom section. You need to incorporate all those tabs into the single Ai tutor, which can run whatever tools required (maybe notes/discussion can be a small additional indication). No one's going to be using the Flashcards section, and it's calling probably the same LLM as the AI tutor, so might as well combine them. For the quiz, maybe when the video ends or the user wants to continue, the Ai Tutor goes into "quiz mode" forcing the user to attempt or pass the quiz (depending on the settings?). Think of this like Cursor but for Education. Cursors powerful agent can handle/do so much, you're not using 3-4 different fields. Oh and have it on the right side instead of transcript, so it's right there in users faces instead of having to scroll down. bestwillcui 8 months ago | parent | next [–] Great points. Definitely will improve the section lectures on the left, some formatting stuff to think about with the bottom section/transcript as well. Not completely sure about the AI tutor points though. I don't think the standard AI chat interface is the ideal form factor for the average person trying to learn something, and there's value in having pre-generated content that users can see instead of having to actively go to the tutor. Also, a lot of people do like using flashcards specifically to learn! Granted, our current implementation is pretty barebones so it's not super useful yet. And definitely agree that things can be cleaned up quite a bit. wormius 8 months ago | prev | next [–] You're compensating the youtube video creators for this, how? Are you asking their permission? Or is this similar to how all the AI scammers operate and just extracting value from other peoples work without compensation? Just curious if this will help the people who are actually doing the source work or if it's just another way to take other people's labor and make money off it without anything in return for them. And no, I don't consider "they get extra views" a valid answer. Especially if you expect to make the windfall you want to make off their labor. tdthree 8 months ago | parent | next [–] We do a revenue share with the creators for any content we monetize. And if they don't want their content on our platform, we will take it down. pavel_lishin 8 months ago | root | parent | next [–] Do folks have to explicitly opt-in to have their videos be a part of your platform? Or can users pick a random video, and have it generate a "course"? ranger_danger 8 months ago | parent | prev | next [–] > extracting value from other peoples work without compensation You mean like how all art is created? Nothing is original... everything we create is a sum of past inspirations, human or not. eochaid 8 months ago | prev | next [–] This is a fun concept, and I love the name! I’m curious why you didn’t use multiple choice for the exercises? I feel like those would be easier than typing out full answers and be closer to MOOC style homework. Maybe have a longer written question at the end of a section. The exercises work pretty well, I like the highlighting red wrong vs. green right. It does feel a bit like the MOOC-style discussions. The tutor doesn’t just tell you the answers which is cool, but something about talking with the tutor feels a bit flat. And the flashcards weren’t very helpful for the course I picked. I could see myself doing some courses like this with some more gamification. Being able to filter by course provider (Ycombinator, or MIT) would be cool too. bestwillcui 8 months ago | parent | next [–] Thanks! We do have multiple choice questions now (agreed) but some of the older courses were generated when there were only short answer. Anything specific we could improve about talking to the tutor? Definitely will add some of those features and gamify better. eochaid 8 months ago | root | parent | next [–] Maybe give the tutor some personality or persona (having it speak as the instructor). I’m probably off base with that suggestion, though. Again, very cool idea. I'm going to try some of the nuclear courses later this week. Best of luck! sigmaisaletter 8 months ago | root | parent | next [–] Please don't, or at least don't without a looooooooooot of behind-closed-doors trial and error. There are few things more off-putting then an AI try-hard "i am a quirky hooman with quirky hooman personality traits". vm 8 months ago | prev | next [–] For anyone else interested in Bloom's 2-sigma, here's the original paper (1984): https://web.mit.edu/5.95/readings/bloom-two-sigma.pdf Blows my mind that 1:1 tutoring dwarfs the impact of other factors such as socioeconomic status, reinforcement, assigned homework, classroom morale, etc (at least according to the researchers). Does anyone know if this thesis has been replicated? Or if these results hold in modern times (original study was 40 years ago)? WildRyc 8 months ago | parent | next [–] The article states that Anaina and Burke separately conducted their tests, but social robots [1] have been shown to be effective in individual tutoring. Human tutoring is not always better than a well-designed computer program [2]. There have been issues with how studies interpret their effect on group size / scalability [3]. [1] https://www.science.org/doi/full/10.1126/scirobotics.aat5954 [2] https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00461520.2011.61... [3] https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.3102/0013189X2091279... adobbs 8 months ago | parent | prev | next
