---
id: 363
url: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-025-03727-9
title: Longitudinal relationships between pet ownership and cognitive functioning
  in later adulthood across pet types and individuals’ ages | Scientific Reports
domain: www.nature.com
source_date: '2025-07-06'
tags:
- academic-paper
- biology
summary: 'This longitudinal study, spanning 18 years of data from over 8,000 European
  adults aged 50+, found that pet ownership is associated with slower cognitive decline
  in executive functioning and episodic memory—key markers of healthy aging. Importantly,
  the protective effect varied by pet type: **dog and cat ownership showed significant
  benefits in slowing cognitive decline, while bird and fish ownership showed no such
  association**. The findings suggest that interactive pets may act as a protective
  factor against age-related cognitive decline, though the mechanisms likely involve
  increased physical activity, reduced loneliness, lower stress levels, and enhanced
  social interaction.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Longitudinal relationships between pet ownership and cognitive functioning in later adulthood across pet types and individuals’ ages | Scientific Reports

Download PDF Subjects Human behaviour Psychology Abstract Pet ownership has been shown to have a positive influence on cognitive functioning and cognitive decline in late adulthood. However, there is limited understanding of how different species of pets are associated with these outcomes in different age groups. This study employed a multilevel modelling approach using data from eight waves of the Survey of Health and Retirement in Europe (SHARE) to longitudinally examine: (1) the relationship between pet ownership and cognitive decline over 18 years among adults aged 50 and older, (2) The moderating role of younger vs. older age subgroups on this relationship, and (3) the distinct role of owning dogs, cats, birds, and fish. The targeted cognitive domains were executive functioning and episodic memory. Results confirmed that pet ownership is associated with slower decline in both cognitive domains. While age group did not moderate this relationship, differences emerged in the relationship between cognitive decline and individual pet species. Dog and cat ownership was associated with slower cognitive decline compared to no pet ownership; bird and fish ownership showed no such association. These findings suggest that dog and cat ownership might act as a protective factor aiding to slow down cognitive decline, thus contributing to healthy cognitive ageing. Similar content being viewed by others Pet ownership and maintenance of cognitive function in community-residing older adults: evidence from the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA) Article Open access 07 September 2023 Evidence for optimal semantic search throughout adulthood Article Open access 18 December 2023 A randomized, controlled clinical trial demonstrates improved owner-assessed cognitive function in senior dogs receiving a senolytic and NAD+ precursor combination Article Open access 29 May 2024 Introduction Age-related cognitive decline is an increasingly pressing concern in public health, which may begin in early adulthood and accelerate with increasing age 1 , 2 . While much research is still investigating the precise mechanisms of cognitive ageing, previous studies have identified several contributing factors, including for example genetics, general health and lifestyle choices 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 . Cognitive decline is a major public health concern on both individual and societal levels due to its association with diminished well-being and health-related quality of life 8 , 9 as well as increased caregiving burden 10 and health- and long-term care costs 11 . Therefore, it is important to investigate potential avenues to support cognitive health across the lifespan. With regards to individual lifestyle factors, previous research has shown that, for example, an adherence to a Mediterranean- or DASH-style diet rich in vegetables, fruits, whole grains and unsaturated fats; sleeping 7–8 h per night with limited night-time fragmentation; regular participation in social clubs or volunteering; enrolment in adult-education courses; or employment in cognitively demanding occupations, are related to reduced or delayed deterioration of cognitive functioning 12 , 13 , 14 . Another potentially protective factor of cognitive health, which has received so far relatively little attention, is pet ownership. Approximately 38% of Europeans own pets, with similar rates of pet ownership estimated in older adults aged 50 and above 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 . Numerous studies have linked pet ownership to a range of physical and mental health benefits 18 , 19 , 20 . When it comes to pet ownership in later age specifically, it has been shown to have a positive effect on older adults’ well-being and feelings of companionship 19 as well as on their physical health. A systematic review by Gee and Mueller 20 found robust evidence linking pet ownership to better physical health, in particular, cardiac health and physiological responses to stress, such as lower blood pressure or lower risk of fatal cardiac events in patients with hypertension. Furthermore, the review revealed that pet ownership had important psychosocial benefits. Specifically, older pet owners perceived lower rates of loneliness, and dog ownership in particular was linked to increased physical activity, which in turn related to positive social outcomes. A further systematic review by Hughes and colleagues 21 similarly concluded that human-animal interactions can benefit older adults’ physical but also mental health, including improvements in their quality of life and levels of depression and anxiety. Additionally, they identified five studies suggesting that the human-animal interaction could improve cognitive health and eight studies which found no effect on cognitive functioning. Most of the included studies focused on animal-assisted interventions and the one identified study which focused on pet ownership specifically, albeit cross-sectional, found significantly better executive functioning in pet owners 22 , suggesting that long-term pet ownership might be associated with better cognitive health. The empirical evidence in this newly emerging field of research is still limited, often mixed, and primarily derived from studies involving animal-assisted interventions. However, as outlined in the following, there are several reasons to hypothesize that pet ownership may be associated with slower cognitive decline. Firstly, an increase in physical activity and a decrease in loneliness are both factors known to be related to reduced risk and a slower rate of cognitive decline 23 , 24 Secondly, pet ownership has also been associated with increased social interaction 25 and reduced anxiety symptoms 26 . These factors, as highlighted in meta-analyses 27 , 28 are linked to a lower risk of cognitive impairment in older adults. Thirdly, the presence of a companion animal has further been associated with reductions in stress levels through the decrease in cortisol levels and heart rate during stressful situations 29 . Finally, pet ownership appears to not only lower the blood pressure response to mental stress 30 but has also been associated with lower systemic blood pressure 31 . In sum, these findings highlight the importance of maintaining low stress levels and weak physiological responses to stress (through the excessive cortisol production and the associated hippocampal damage), as they have been linked to reduced risk of cognitive impairment 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 and to less steep cognitive decline 35 , 36 , 37 . Although pet ownership is linked to many factors that have been also related to reduced cognitive decline, there is still only limited longitudinal and population-level research regarding the direct link between pet ownership and cognitive outcomes. There is cross-sectional evidence pointing towards pet ownership being associated with higher levels of cognitive performance in several areas including processing speed, attentional control or episodic memory 38 , 39 . In terms of longitudinal studies, the empirical evidence appears to be inconsistent and dependent on various factors. For example, Branson and Cron 40 found no relationship between pet caretaking and the risk of developing a mild cognitive impairment over a 12-year timespan after adjusting for potential confounding factors in their study of 2251 older adults aged 50 and above. This could be due to the fact pet caretaking might entail limited exposure to pets compared to their ownership, and hence some of the pet ownerships’ benefits associated with effects on cognitive decline were not experienced by all participants. Applebaum and colleagues 41 , on the other hand, found that participants aged 65 and older who owned pets for more than 5 years had higher mean composite cognitive scores compared to those who owned pets for a shorter period of time or not at all. Yet, they found no association between cognitive decline and pet ownership in adults aged between 50 and 65, suggesting that there might be age group differences in the association of pet ownership with cognitive functioning. Therefore, further and fine-grained investigations are necessary to further elucidate the role of age. Lastly, Li and colleagues 42 found slower cognitive decline over 8 years in pet owners compared to non-owners in measures of verbal fluency and verbal memory. Their additional analysis showed that pet ownership was associated with a slower decline in these domains only in individuals living alone compared to those living with others. To better understand the pattern of associations between pet ownership and cognitive decline, it would also be of interest to separately examine the contributions of owning different species of pets. For example, Friedmann and colleagues 43 found, with modest to moderate effect sizes, that pet owners, and especially dog owners, experienced slower cognitive decline over ten years across various facets of cognitive functioning, such as memory, executive functioning, language, psychomotor speed, and processing speed, compared to non-owners. Cat owners showed less decline in memory and language functioning. Additionally, dog owners who regularly walked their dogs had slower cognitive decline than those who did not, suggesting the important role of physical activity through pet ownership for cognitive health. However, the fact that several domains of cognitive functioning showed slower deterioration also in cat owners and dog owners who did not walk their dogs, implies that other factors besides physical activity per se may be at play. Despite the potential recall bias, as the participants had to recall having a pet in the past, these findings highlight the need to further scrutinise in detail the associations of different pet species with cognitive decline. To build on these previous findings and to overcome some of the remaining research gaps outlined above, the present study will first aim to investigate the association of overall pet owner
