---
id: 18
url: https://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.042/spring18/mcs.pdf
title: Mathematics for computer science
domain: courses.csail.mit.edu
source_date: '2026-01-09'
tags:
- academic-paper
- tutorial
summary: 'This is MIT''s "Mathematics for Computer Science" textbook (2018), authored
  by Lehman, Leighton, and Meyer, covering fundamental mathematical concepts essential
  for computer scientists. The comprehensive text is organized into five main parts:
  Proofs (covering logical reasoning, induction, and recursion), Structures (number
  theory, graphs, and networks), Counting (combinatorics and generating functions),
  Probability (random variables and distributions), and Recurrences (solving recurrence
  relations). The authors emphasize that proofs are central to both genuine mathematical
  understanding and computer science applications like software verification.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Mathematics for computer science

“mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page i — #1 Mathematics for Computer Science revised Wednesday 6th June, 2018, 13:43 Eric Lehman Google Inc. F Thomson Leighton Department of Mathematics and the Computer Science and AI Laboratory, Massachussetts Institute of Technology; Akamai Technologies Albert R Meyer Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and the Computer Science and AI Laboratory, Massachussetts Institute of Technology 2018, Eric Lehman, F Tom Leighton, Albert R Meyer. This work is available under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 license. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page ii — #2 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page iii — #3 Contents I Proofs Introduction 3 0.1 References 4 1 What is a Proof? 5 1.1 Propositions 5 1.2 Predicates 8 1.3 The Axiomatic Method 8 1.4 Our Axioms 9 1.5 Proving an Implication 11 1.6 Proving an “If and Only If” 13 1.7 Proof by Cases 15 1.8 Proof by Contradiction 16 1.9 Good Proofs in Practice 17 1.10 References 19 2 The Well Ordering Principle 29 2.1 Well Ordering Proofs 29 2.2 Template for WOP Proofs 30 2.3 Factoring into Primes 32 2.4 Well Ordered Sets 33 3 Logical Formulas 47 3.1 Propositions from Propositions 48 3.2 Propositional Logic in Computer Programs 52 3.3 Equivalence and Validity 54 3.4 The Algebra of Propositions 57 3.5 The SAT Problem 62 3.6 Predicate Formulas 63 3.7 References 68 4 Mathematical Data Types 103 4.1 Sets 103 4.2 Sequences 108 4.3 Functions 109 4.4 Binary Relations 111 4.5 Finite Cardinality 115 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page iv — #4 Contents iv 5 Induction 137 5.1 Ordinary Induction 137 5.2 Strong Induction 146 5.3 Strong Induction vs. Induction vs. Well Ordering 153 6 State Machines 173 6.1 States and Transitions 173 6.2 The Invariant Principle 174 6.3 Partial Correctness & Termination 182 6.4 The Stable Marriage Problem 187 7 Recursive Data Types 217 7.1 Recursive Deﬁnitions and Structural Induction 217 7.2 Strings of Matched Brackets 221 7.3 Recursive Functions on Nonnegative Integers 225 7.4 Arithmetic Expressions 227 7.5 Games as a Recursive Data Type 232 7.6 Search Trees 238 7.7 Induction in Computer Science 257 8 Inﬁnite Sets 295 8.1 Inﬁnite Cardinality 296 8.2 The Halting Problem 305 8.3 The Logic of Sets 309 8.4 Does All This Really Work? 314 II Structures Introduction 339 9 Number Theory 341 9.1 Divisibility 341 9.2 The Greatest Common Divisor 346 9.3 Prime Mysteries 353 9.4 The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic 356 9.5 Alan Turing 358 9.6 Modular Arithmetic 362 9.7 Remainder Arithmetic 364 9.8 Turing’s Code (Version 2.0) 367 9.9 Multiplicative Inverses and Cancelling 369 9.10 Euler’s Theorem 373 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page v — #5 Contents v 9.11 RSA Public Key Encryption 378 9.12 What has SAT got to do with it? 381 9.13 References 382 10 Directed graphs & Partial Orders 421 10.1 Vertex Degrees 423 10.2 Walks and Paths 424 10.3 Adjacency Matrices 427 10.4 Walk Relations 430 10.5 Directed Acyclic Graphs & Scheduling 431 10.6 Partial Orders 439 10.7 Representing Partial Orders by Set Containment 442 10.8 Linear Orders 444 10.9 Product Orders 444 10.10 Equivalence Relations 445 10.11 Summary of Relational Properties 447 10.12 References 449 11 Communication Networks 481 11.1 Routing 481 11.2 Routing Measures 482 11.3 Network Designs 485 12 Simple Graphs 501 12.1 Vertex Adjacency and Degrees 501 12.2 Sexual Demographics in America 503 12.3 Some Common Graphs 505 12.4 Isomorphism 507 12.5 Bipartite Graphs & Matchings 509 12.6 Coloring 514 12.7 Walks in Simple Graphs 519 12.8 Connectivity 521 12.9 Special Walks and Tours 523 12.10 k-connected Graphs 525 12.11 Forests & Trees 527 12.12 References 535 13 Planar Graphs 575 13.1 Drawing Graphs in the Plane 575 13.2 Deﬁnitions of Planar Graphs 575 13.3 Euler’s Formula 586 13.4 Bounding the Number of Edges in a Planar Graph 587 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page vi — #6 Contents vi 13.5 Returning to K5 and K3;3 588 13.6 Coloring Planar Graphs 589 13.7 Classifying Polyhedra 591 13.8 Another Characterization for Planar Graphs 594 III Counting Introduction 603 14 Sums and Asymptotics 605 14.1 The Value of an Annuity 606 14.2 Sums of Powers 612 14.3 Approximating Sums 614 14.4 Hanging Out Over the Edge 618 14.5 Products 624 14.6 Double Trouble 627 14.7 Asymptotic Notation 630 15 Cardinality Rules 655 15.1 Counting One Thing by Counting Another 655 15.2 Counting Sequences 656 15.3 The Generalized Product Rule 659 15.4 The Division Rule 663 15.5 Counting Subsets 665 15.6 Sequences with Repetitions 667 15.7 Counting Practice: Poker Hands 671 15.8 The Pigeonhole Principle 676 15.9 Inclusion-Exclusion 685 15.10 Combinatorial Proofs 690 15.11 References 694 16 Generating Functions 735 16.1 Inﬁnite Series 735 16.2 Counting with Generating Functions 737 16.3 Partial Fractions 743 16.4 Solving Linear Recurrences 746 16.5 Formal Power Series 751 16.6 References 754 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page vii — #7 Contents vii IV Probability Introduction 771 17 Events and Probability Spaces 773 17.1 Let’s Make a Deal 773 17.2 The Four Step Method 774 17.3 Strange Dice 783 17.4 The Birthday Principle 790 17.5 Set Theory and Probability 792 17.6 References 796 18 Conditional Probability 805 18.1 Monty Hall Confusion 805 18.2 Deﬁnition and Notation 806 18.3 The Four-Step Method for Conditional Probability 808 18.4 Why Tree Diagrams Work 810 18.5 The Law of Total Probability 818 18.6 Simpson’s Paradox 820 18.7 Independence 822 18.8 Mutual Independence 824 18.9 Probability versus Conﬁdence 828 19 Random Variables 857 19.1 Random Variable Examples 857 19.2 Independence 859 19.3 Distribution Functions 861 19.4 Great Expectations 869 19.5 Linearity of Expectation 881 19.6 Really Great Expectations 890 20 Deviation from the Mean 915 20.1 Markov’s Theorem 915 20.2 Chebyshev’s Theorem 918 20.3 Properties of Variance 922 20.4 Estimation by Random Sampling 928 20.5 Sums of Random Variables 933 21 Random Walks 965 21.1 Gambler’s Ruin 965 21.2 Random Walks on Graphs 975 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page viii — #8 Contents viii V Recurrences Introduction 993 22 Recurrences 995 22.1 The Towers of Hanoi 995 22.2 Merge Sort 998 22.3 Linear Recurrences 1002 22.4 Divide-and-Conquer Recurrences 1009 22.5 A Feel for Recurrences 1016 Bibliography 1023 Glossary of Symbols 1027 Index 1031 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 1 — #9 I Proofs “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 2 — #10 “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 3 — #11 Introduction This text explains how to use mathematical models and methods to analyze prob- lems that arise in computer science. Proofs play a central role in this work because the authors share a belief with most mathematicians that proofs are essential for genuine understanding. Proofs also play a growing role in computer science; they are used to certify that software and hardware will always behave correctly, some- thing that no amount of testing can do. Simply put, a proof is a method of establishing truth. Like beauty, “truth” some- times depends on the eye of the beholder, and it should not be surprising that what constitutes a proof differs among ﬁelds. For example, in the judicial system, legal truth is decided by a jury based on the allowable evidence presented at trial. In the business world, authoritative truth is speciﬁed by a trusted person or organization, or maybe just your boss. In ﬁelds such as physics or biology, scientiﬁc truth is conﬁrmed by experiment.1 In statistics, probable truth is established by statistical analysis of sample data. Philosophical proof involves careful exposition and persuasion typically based on a series of small, plausible arguments. The best example begins with “Cogito ergo sum,” a Latin sentence that translates as “I think, therefore I am.” This phrase comes from the beginning of a 17th century essay by the mathematician/philosopher, Ren´e Descartes, and it is one of the most famous quotes in the world: do a web search for it, and you will be ﬂooded with hits. Deducing your existence from the fact that you’re thinking about your existence is a pretty cool and persuasive-sounding idea. However, with just a few more lines 1Actually, only scientiﬁc falsehood can be demonstrated by an experiment—when the experiment fails to behave as predicted. But no amount of experiment can conﬁrm that the next experiment won’t fail. For this reason, scientists rarely speak of truth, but rather of theories that accurately predict past, and anticipated future, experiments. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 4 — #12 0.1. References 4 of argument in this vein, Descartes goes on to conclude that there is an inﬁnitely beneﬁcent God. Whether or not you believe in an inﬁnitely beneﬁcent God, you’ll probably agree that any very short “proof” of God’s inﬁnite beneﬁcence is bound to be far-fetched. So even in masterful hands, this approach is not reliable. Mathematics has its own speciﬁc notion of “proof.” Deﬁnition. A mathematical proof of a proposition is a chain of logical deductions leading to the proposition from a base set of axioms. The three key ideas in this deﬁnition are highlighted: proposition, logical deduc- tion, and axiom. Chapter 1 examines these three ideas along with some basic ways of organizing proofs. Chapter 2 introduces the Well Ordering Principle, a basic method of proof; later, Chapter 5 introduces the closely related proof method of induction. If you’re going to prove a proposition, you’d better have a precise understand- ing of what the proposition means. To avoid ambiguity and uncertain deﬁnitions in ordinary language, mathematicians use language very precisely, and they often express propositions using logical formulas; these are the subject of Chapter 3. The ﬁrst three Chapters assume the reader is familiar with a few mathematical concepts like sets and functions. Chapters 4 and 8 offer a more careful look at such mathematical data types, examining in particular properties and methods for proving things about inﬁnite sets. Chapter 7 goes on to examine recursively deﬁned data types. 0.1 References [14], [49], [1] “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 5 — #13 1 What is a Proof? 1.1 Propositions Deﬁnition. A proposition is a statement (communication) that is either true or false. For example, both of the following statements are propositions. The ﬁrst is true, and the second is false. Proposition 1.1.1. 2 + 3 = 5. Proposition 1.1.2. 1 + 1 = 3. Being true or false doesn’t sound like much of a limitation, but it does exclude statements such as “Wherefore art thou Romeo?” and “Give me an A!” It also ex- cludes statements whose truth varies with circumstance such as, “It’s ﬁve o’clock,” or “the stock market will rise tomorrow.” Unfortunately it is not always easy to decide if a claimed proposition is true or false: Claim 1.1.3. For every nonnegative integer n the value of n2 C n C 41 is prime. (A prime is an integer greater than 1 that is not divisible by any other integer greater than 1. For example, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, are the ﬁrst ﬁve primes.) Let’s try some numerical experimentation to check this proposition. Let p.n/ WWD n2 C n C 41:1 (1.1) We begin with p.0/ D 41, which is prime; then p.1/ D 43; p.2/ D 47; p.3/ D 53; : : : ; p.20/ D 461 are each prime. Hmmm, starts to look like a plausible claim. In fact we can keep checking through n D 39 and conﬁrm that p.39/ D 1601 is prime. But p.40/ D 402 C 40 C 41 D 41  41, which is not prime. So Claim 1.1.3 is false since it’s not true that p.n/ is prime for all nonnegative integers n. In fact, it’s not hard to show that no polynomial with integer coefﬁcients can map all 1The symbol WWD means “equal by deﬁnition.” It’s always ok simply to write “=” instead of WWD, but reminding the reader that an equality holds by deﬁnition can be helpful. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 6 — #14 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 6 nonnegative numbers into prime numbers, unless it’s a constant (see Problem 1.25). But this example highlights the point that, in general, you can’t check a claim about an inﬁnite set by checking a ﬁnite sample of its elements, no matter how large the sample. By the way, propositions like this about all numbers or all items of some kind are so common that there is a special notation for them. With this notation, Claim 1.1.3 would be 8n 2 N: p.n/ is prime: (1.2) Here the symbol 8 is read “for all.” The symbol N stands for the set of nonnegative integers: 0, 1, 2, 3, . . .(ask your instructor for the complete list). The symbol “2” is read as “is a member of,” or “belongs to,” or simply as “is in.” The period after the N is just a separator between phrases. Here are two even more extreme examples: Conjecture. [Euler] The equation a4 C b4 C c4 D d 4 has no solution when a; b; c; d are positive integers. Euler (pronounced “oiler”) conjectured this in 1769. But the conjecture was proved false 218 years later by Noam Elkies at a liberal arts school up Mass Ave. The solution he found was a D 95800; b D 217519; c D 414560; d D 422481. In logical notation, Euler’s Conjecture could be written, 8a 2 ZC 8b 2 ZC 8c 2 ZC 8d 2 ZC: a4 C b4 C c4 ¤ d 4: Here, ZC is a symbol for the positive integers. Strings of 8’s like this are usually abbreviated for easier reading: 8a; b; c; d 2 ZC: a4 C b4 C c4 ¤ d 4: Here’s another claim which would be hard to falsify by sampling: the smallest possible x; y; z that satisfy the equality each have more than 1000 digits! False Claim. 313.x3 C y3/ D z3 has no solution when x; y; z 2 ZC. It’s worth mentioning a couple of further famous propositions whose proofs were sought for centuries before ﬁnally being discovered: Proposition 1.1.4 (Four Color Theorem). Every map can be colored with 4 colors so that adjacent2 regions have different colors. 2Two regions are adjacent only when they share a boundary segment of positive length. They are not considered to be adjacent if their boundaries meet only at a few points. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 7 — #15 1.1. Propositions 7 Several incorrect proofs of this theorem have been published, including one that stood for 10 years in the late 19th century before its mistake was found. A laborious proof was ﬁnally found in 1976 by mathematicians Appel and Haken, who used a complex computer program to categorize the four-colorable maps. The program left a few thousand maps uncategorized, which were checked by hand by Haken and his assistants—among them his 15-year-old daughter. There was reason to doubt whether this was a legitimate proof—the proof was too big to be checked without a computer. No one could guarantee that the com- puter calculated correctly, nor was anyone enthusiastic about exerting the effort to recheck the four-colorings of thousands of maps that were done by hand. Two decades later a mostly intelligible proof of the Four Color Theorem was found, though a computer is still needed to check four-colorability of several hundred spe- cial maps.3 Proposition 1.1.5 (Fermat’s Last Theorem). There are no positive integers x, y and z such that xn C yn D zn for some integer n > 2. In a book he was reading around 1630, Fermat claimed to have a proof for this proposition, but not enough space in the margin to write it down. Over the years, the Theorem was proved to hold for all n up to 4,000,000, but we’ve seen that this shouldn’t necessarily inspire conﬁdence that it holds for all n. There is, after all, a clear resemblance between Fermat’s Last Theorem and Euler’s false Conjecture. Finally, in 1994, British mathematician Andrew Wiles gave a proof, after seven years of working in secrecy and isolation in his attic. His proof did not ﬁt in any margin.4 Finally, let’s mention another simply stated proposition whose truth remains un- known. Conjecture 1.1.6 (Goldbach). Every even integer greater than 2 is the sum of two primes. Goldbach’s Conjecture dates back to 1742. It is known to hold for all numbers up to 1018, but to this day, no one knows whether it’s true or false. 3The story of the proof of the Four Color Theorem is told in a well-reviewed popular (non- technical) book: “Four Colors Sufﬁce. How the Map Problem was Solved.” Robin Wilson. Princeton Univ. Press, 2003, 276pp. ISBN 0-691-11533-8. 4In fact, Wiles’ original proof was wrong, but he and several collaborators used his ideas to arrive at a correct proof a year later. This story is the subject of the popular book, Fermat’s Enigma by Simon Singh, Walker & Company, November, 1997. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 8 — #16 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 8 For a computer scientist, some of the most important things to prove are the correctness of programs and systems—whether a program or system does what it’s supposed to. Programs are notoriously buggy, and there’s a growing community of researchers and practitioners trying to ﬁnd ways to prove program correctness. These efforts have been successful enough in the case of CPU chips that they are now routinely used by leading chip manufacturers to prove chip correctness and avoid some notorious past mistakes. Developing mathematical methods to verify programs and systems remains an active research area. We’ll illustrate some of these methods in Chapter 5. 1.2 Predicates A predicate can be understood as a proposition whose truth depends on the value of one or more variables. So “n is a perfect square” describes a predicate, since you can’t say if it’s true or false until you know what the value of the variable n happens to be. Once you know, for example, that n equals 4, the predicate becomes the true proposition “4 is a perfect square”. Remember, nothing says that the proposition has to be true: if the value of n were 5, you would get the false proposition “5 is a perfect square.” Like other propositions, predicates are often named with a letter. Furthermore, a function-like notation is used to denote a predicate supplied with speciﬁc variable values. For example, we might use the name “P ” for predicate above: P.n/ WWD “n is a perfect square”; and repeat the remarks above by asserting that P.4/ is true, and P.5/ is false. This notation for predicates is confusingly similar to ordinary function notation. If P is a predicate, then P.n/ is either true or false, depending on the value of n. On the other hand, if p is an ordinary function, like n2C1, then p.n/ is a numerical quantity. Don’t confuse these two! 1.3 The Axiomatic Method The standard procedure for establishing truth in mathematics was invented by Eu- clid, a mathematician working in Alexandria, Egypt around 300 BC. His idea was to begin with ﬁve assumptions about geometry, which seemed undeniable based on direct experience. (For example, “There is a straight line segment between every “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 9 — #17 1.4. Our Axioms 9 pair of points”.) Propositions like these that are simply accepted as true are called axioms. Starting from these axioms, Euclid established the truth of many additional propo- sitions by providing “proofs.” A proof is a sequence of logical deductions from axioms and previously proved statements that concludes with the proposition in question. You probably wrote many proofs in high school geometry class, and you’ll see a lot more in this text. There are several common terms for a proposition that has been proved. The different terms hint at the role of the proposition within a larger body of work.  Important true propositions are called theorems.  A lemma is a preliminary proposition useful for proving later propositions.  A corollary is a proposition that follows in just a few logical steps from a theorem. These deﬁnitions are not precise. In fact, sometimes a good lemma turns out to be far more important than the theorem it was originally used to prove. Euclid’s axiom-and-proof approach, now called the axiomatic method, remains the foundation for mathematics today. In fact, just a handful of axioms, called the Zermelo-Fraenkel with Choice axioms (ZFC), together with a few logical deduction rules, appear to be sufﬁcient to derive essentially all of mathematics. We’ll examine these in Chapter 8. 1.4 Our Axioms The ZFC axioms are important in studying and justifying the foundations of math- ematics, but for practical purposes, they are much too primitive. Proving theorems in ZFC is a little like writing programs in byte code instead of a full-ﬂedged pro- gramming language—by one reckoning, a formal proof in ZFC that 2 C 2 D 4 requires more than 20,000 steps! So instead of starting with ZFC, we’re going to take a huge set of axioms as our foundation: we’ll accept all familiar facts from high school math. This will give us a quick launch, but you may ﬁnd this imprecise speciﬁcation of the axioms troubling at times. For example, in the midst of a proof, you may start to wonder, “Must I prove this little fact or can I take it as an axiom?” There really is no absolute answer, since what’s reasonable to assume and what requires proof depends on the circumstances and the audience. A good general guideline is simply to be up front about what you’re assuming. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 10 — #18 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 10 1.4.1 Logical Deductions Logical deductions, or inference rules, are used to prove new propositions using previously proved ones. A fundamental inference rule is modus ponens. This rule says that a proof of P together with a proof that P IMPLIES Q is a proof of Q. Inference rules are sometimes written in a funny notation. For example, modus ponens is written: Rule. P; P IMPLIES Q Q When the statements above the line, called the antecedents, are proved, then we can consider the statement below the line, called the conclusion or consequent, to also be proved. A key requirement of an inference rule is that it must be sound: an assignment of truth values to the letters P , Q, ..., that makes all the antecedents true must also make the consequent true. So if we start off with true axioms and apply sound inference rules, everything we prove will also be true. There are many other natural, sound inference rules, for example: Rule. P IMPLIES Q; Q IMPLIES R P IMPLIES R Rule. NOT.P / IMPLIES NOT.Q/ Q IMPLIES P On the other hand, Non-Rule. NOT.P / IMPLIES NOT.Q/ P IMPLIES Q is not sound: if P is assigned T and Q is assigned F, then the antecedent is true and the consequent is not. As with axioms, we will not be too formal about the set of legal inference rules. Each step in a proof should be clear and “logical”; in particular, you should state what previously proved facts are used to derive each new conclusion. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 11 — #19 1.5. Proving an Implication 11 1.4.2 Patterns of Proof In principle, a proof can be any sequence of logical deductions from axioms and previously proved statements that concludes with the proposition in question. This freedom in constructing a proof can seem overwhelming at ﬁrst. How do you even start a proof? Here’s the good news: many proofs follow one of a handful of standard tem- plates. Each proof has it own details, of course, but these templates at least provide you with an outline to ﬁll in. We’ll go through several of these standard patterns, pointing out the basic idea and common pitfalls and giving some examples. Many of these templates ﬁt together; one may give you a top-level outline while others help you at the next level of detail. And we’ll show you other, more sophisticated proof techniques later on. The recipes below are very speciﬁc at times, telling you exactly which words to write down on your piece of paper. You’re certainly free to say things your own way instead; we’re just giving you something you could say so that you’re never at a complete loss. 1.5 Proving an Implication Propositions of the form “If P , then Q” are called implications. This implication is often rephrased as “P IMPLIES Q.” Here are some examples:  (Quadratic Formula) If ax2 C bx C c D 0 and a ¤ 0, then x D   b ˙ p b2   4ac  =2a:  (Goldbach’s Conjecture 1.1.6 rephrased) If n is an even integer greater than 2, then n is a sum of two primes.  If 0  x  2, then  x3 C 4x C 1 > 0. There are a couple of standard methods for proving an implication. 1.5.1 Method #1 In order to prove that P IMPLIES Q: 1. Write, “Assume P .” 2. Show that Q logically follows. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 12 — #20 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 12 Example Theorem 1.5.1. If 0  x  2, then  x3 C 4x C 1 > 0. Before we write a proof of this theorem, we have to do some scratchwork to ﬁgure out why it is true. The inequality certainly holds for x D 0; then the left side is equal to 1 and 1 > 0. As x grows, the 4x term (which is positive) initially seems to have greater magnitude than  x3 (which is negative). For example, when x D 1, we have 4x D 4, but  x3 D  1 only. In fact, it looks like  x3 doesn’t begin to dominate until x > 2. So it seems the  x3 C4x part should be nonnegative for all x between 0 and 2, which would imply that  x3 C 4x C 1 is positive. So far, so good. But we still have to replace all those “seems like” phrases with solid, logical arguments. We can get a better handle on the critical  x3 C 4x part by factoring it, which is not too hard:  x3 C 4x D x.2   x/.2 C x/ Aha! For x between 0 and 2, all of the terms on the right side are nonnegative. And a product of nonnegative terms is also nonnegative. Let’s organize this blizzard of observations into a clean proof. Proof. Assume 0  x  2. Then x, 2 x and 2Cx are all nonnegative. Therefore, the product of these terms is also nonnegative. Adding 1 to this product gives a positive number, so: x.2   x/.2 C x/ C 1 > 0 Multiplying out on the left side proves that  x3 C 4x C 1 > 0 as claimed.  There are a couple points here that apply to all proofs:  You’ll often need to do some scratchwork while you’re trying to ﬁgure out the logical steps of a proof. Your scratchwork can be as disorganized as you like—full of dead-ends, strange diagrams, obscene words, whatever. But keep your scratchwork separate from your ﬁnal proof, which should be clear and concise.  Proofs typically begin with the word “Proof” and end with some sort of de- limiter like  or “QED.” The only purpose for these conventions is to clarify where proofs begin and end. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 13 — #21 1.6. Proving an “If and Only If” 13 1.5.2 Method #2 - Prove the Contrapositive An implication (“P IMPLIES Q”) is logically equivalent to its contrapositive NOT.Q/ IMPLIES NOT.P / : Proving one is as good as proving the other, and proving the contrapositive is some- times easier than proving the original statement. If so, then you can proceed as follows: 1. Write, “We prove the contrapositive:” and then state the contrapositive. 2. Proceed as in Method #1. Example Theorem 1.5.2. If r is irrational, then pr is also irrational. A number is rational when it equals a quotient of integers —that is, if it equals m=n for some integers m and n. If it’s not rational, then it’s called irrational. So we must show that if r is not a ratio of integers, then pr is also not a ratio of integers. That’s pretty convoluted! We can eliminate both not’s and simplify the proof by using the contrapositive instead. Proof. We prove the contrapositive: if pr is rational, then r is rational. Assume that pr is rational. Then there exist integers m and n such that: pr D m n Squaring both sides gives: r D m2 n2 Since m2 and n2 are integers, r is also rational.  1.6 Proving an “If and Only If” Many mathematical theorems assert that two statements are logically equivalent; that is, one holds if and only if the other does. Here is an example that has been known for several thousand years: Two triangles have the same side lengths if and only if two side lengths and the angle between those sides are the same. The phrase “if and only if” comes up so often that it is often abbreviated “iff.” “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 14 — #22 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 14 1.6.1 Method #1: Prove Each Statement Implies the Other The statement “P IFF Q” is equivalent to the two statements “P IMPLIES Q” and “Q IMPLIES P .” So you can prove an “iff” by proving two implications: 1. Write, “We prove P implies Q and vice-versa.” 2. Write, “First, we show P implies Q.” Do this by one of the methods in Section 1.5. 3. Write, “Now, we show Q implies P .” Again, do this by one of the methods in Section 1.5. 1.6.2 Method #2: Construct a Chain of Iffs In order to prove that P is true iff Q is true: 1. Write, “We construct a chain of if-and-only-if implications.” 2. Prove P is equivalent to a second statement which is equivalent to a third statement and so forth until you reach Q. This method sometimes requires more ingenuity than the ﬁrst, but the result can be a short, elegant proof. Example The standard deviation of a sequence of values x1; x2; : : : ; xn is deﬁned to be: s .x1   /2 C .x2   /2 C    C .xn   /2 n (1.3) where  is the average or mean of the values:  WWD x1 C x2 C    C xn n Theorem 1.6.1. The standard deviation of a sequence of values x1; : : : ; xn is zero iff all the values are equal to the mean. For example, the standard deviation of test scores is zero if and only if everyone scored exactly the class average. Proof. We construct a chain of “iff” implications, starting with the statement that the standard deviation (1.3) is zero: s .x1   /2 C .x2   /2 C    C .xn   /2 n D 0: (1.4) “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 15 — #23 1.7. Proof by Cases 15 Now since zero is the only number whose square root is zero, equation (1.4) holds iff .x1   /2 C .x2   /2 C    C .xn   /2 D 0: (1.5) Squares of real numbers are always nonnegative, so every term on the left-hand side of equation (1.5) is nonnegative. This means that (1.5) holds iff Every term on the left-hand side of (1.5) is zero. (1.6) But a term .xi   /2 is zero iff xi D , so (1.6) is true iff Every xi equals the mean.  1.7 Proof by Cases Breaking a complicated proof into cases and proving each case separately is a com- mon, useful proof strategy. Here’s an amusing example. Let’s agree that given any two people, either they have met or not. If every pair of people in a group has met, we’ll call the group a club. If every pair of people in a group has not met, we’ll call it a group of strangers. Theorem. Every collection of 6 people includes a club of 3 people or a group of 3 strangers. Proof. The proof is by case analysis5. Let x denote one of the six people. There are two cases: 1. Among 5 other people besides x, at least 3 have met x. 2. Among the 5 other people, at least 3 have not met x. Now, we have to be sure that at least one of these two cases must hold,6 but that’s easy: we’ve split the 5 people into two groups, those who have shaken hands with x and those who have not, so one of the groups must have at least half the people. Case 1: Suppose that at least 3 people did meet x. This case splits into two subcases: 5Describing your approach at the outset helps orient the reader. 6Part of a case analysis argument is showing that you’ve covered all the cases. This is often obvious, because the two cases are of the form “P ” and “not P .” However, the situation above is not stated quite so simply. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 16 — #24 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 16 Case 1.1: No pair among those people met each other. Then these people are a group of at least 3 strangers. The theorem holds in this subcase. Case 1.2: Some pair among those people have met each other. Then that pair, together with x, form a club of 3 people. So the theorem holds in this subcase. This implies that the theorem holds in Case 1. Case 2: Suppose that at least 3 people did not meet x. This case also splits into two subcases: Case 2.1: Every pair among those people met each other. Then these people are a club of at least 3 people. So the theorem holds in this subcase. Case 2.2: Some pair among those people have not met each other. Then that pair, together with x, form a group of at least 3 strangers. So the theorem holds in this subcase. This implies that the theorem also holds in Case 2, and therefore holds in all cases.  1.8 Proof by Contradiction In a proof by contradiction, or indirect proof, you show that if a proposition were false, then some false fact would be true. Since a false fact by deﬁnition can’t be true, the proposition must be true. Proof by contradiction is always a viable approach. However, as the name sug- gests, indirect proofs can be a little convoluted, so direct proofs are generally prefer- able when they are available. Method: In order to prove a proposition P by contradiction: 1. Write, “We use proof by contradiction.” 2. Write, “Suppose P is false.” 3. Deduce something known to be false (a logical contradiction). 4. Write, “This is a contradiction. Therefore, P must be true.” “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 17 — #25 1.9. Good Proofs in Practice 17 Example We’ll prove by contradiction that p 2 is irrational. Remember that a number is ra- tional if it is equal to a ratio of integers—for example, 3:5 D 7=2 and 0:1111    D 1=9 are rational numbers. Theorem 1.8.1. p 2 is irrational. Proof. We use proof by contradiction. Suppose the claim is false, and p 2 is ratio- nal. Then we can write p 2 as a fraction n=d in lowest terms. Squaring both sides gives 2 D n2=d 2 and so 2d 2 D n2. This implies that n is a multiple of 2 (see Problems 1.14 and 1.15). Therefore n2 must be a multiple of 4. But since 2d 2 D n2, we know 2d 2 is a multiple of 4 and so d 2 is a multiple of 2. This implies that d is a multiple of 2. So, the numerator and denominator have 2 as a common factor, which contradicts the fact that n=d is in lowest terms. Thus, p 2 must be irrational.  1.9 Good Proofs in Practice One purpose of a proof is to establish the truth of an assertion with absolute cer- tainty, and mechanically checkable proofs of enormous length or complexity can accomplish this. But humanly intelligible proofs are the only ones that help some- one understand the subject. Mathematicians generally agree that important mathe- matical results can’t be fully understood until their proofs are understood. That is why proofs are an important part of the curriculum. To be understandable and helpful, more is required of a proof than just logical correctness: a good proof must also be clear. Correctness and clarity usually go together; a well-written proof is more likely to be a correct proof, since mistakes are harder to hide. In practice, the notion of proof is a moving target. Proofs in a professional research journal are generally unintelligible to all but a few experts who know all the terminology and prior results used in the proof. Conversely, proofs in the ﬁrst weeks of a beginning course like 6.042 would be regarded as tediously long-winded by a professional mathematician. In fact, what we accept as a good proof later in the term will be different from what we consider good proofs in the ﬁrst couple of weeks of 6.042. But even so, we can offer some general tips on writing good proofs: State your game plan. A good proof begins by explaining the general line of rea- soning, for example, “We use case analysis” or “We argue by contradiction.” “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 18 — #26 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 18 Keep a linear ﬂow. Sometimes proofs are written like mathematical mosaics, with juicy tidbits of independent reasoning sprinkled throughout. This is not good. The steps of an argument should follow one another in an intelligible order. A proof is an essay, not a calculation. Many students initially write proofs the way they compute integrals. The result is a long sequence of expressions without explanation, making it very hard to follow. This is bad. A good proof usually looks like an essay with some equations thrown in. Use complete sentences. Avoid excessive symbolism. Your reader is probably good at understanding words, but much less skilled at reading arcane mathematical symbols. Use words where you reasonably can. Revise and simplify. Your readers will be grateful. Introduce notation thoughtfully. Sometimes an argument can be greatly simpli- ﬁed by introducing a variable, devising a special notation, or deﬁning a new term. But do this sparingly, since you’re requiring the reader to remember all that new stuff. And remember to actually deﬁne the meanings of new variables, terms, or notations; don’t just start using them! Structure long proofs. Long programs are usually broken into a hierarchy of smaller procedures. Long proofs are much the same. When your proof needed facts that are easily stated, but not readily proved, those fact are best pulled out as preliminary lemmas. Also, if you are repeating essentially the same argu- ment over and over, try to capture that argument in a general lemma, which you can cite repeatedly instead. Be wary of the “obvious.” When familiar or truly obvious facts are needed in a proof, it’s OK to label them as such and to not prove them. But remember that what’s obvious to you may not be—and typically is not—obvious to your reader. Most especially, don’t use phrases like “clearly” or “obviously” in an attempt to bully the reader into accepting something you’re having trouble proving. Also, go on the alert whenever you see one of these phrases in someone else’s proof. Finish. At some point in a proof, you’ll have established all the essential facts you need. Resist the temptation to quit and leave the reader to draw the “obvious” conclusion. Instead, tie everything together yourself and explain why the original claim follows. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 19 — #27 1.10. References 19 Creating a good proof is a lot like creating a beautiful work of art. In fact, mathematicians often refer to really good proofs as being “elegant” or “beautiful.” It takes a practice and experience to write proofs that merit such praises, but to get you started in the right direction, we will provide templates for the most useful proof techniques. Throughout the text there are also examples of bogus proofs—arguments that look like proofs but aren’t. Sometimes a bogus proof can reach false conclusions because of missteps or mistaken assumptions. More subtle bogus proofs reach correct conclusions, but do so in improper ways such as circular reasoning, leaping to unjustiﬁed conclusions, or saying that the hard part of the proof is “left to the reader.” Learning to spot the ﬂaws in improper proofs will hone your skills at seeing how each proof step follows logically from prior steps. It will also enable you to spot ﬂaws in your own proofs. The analogy between good proofs and good programs extends beyond structure. The same rigorous thinking needed for proofs is essential in the design of criti- cal computer systems. When algorithms and protocols only “mostly work” due to reliance on hand-waving arguments, the results can range from problematic to catastrophic. An early example was the Therac 25, a machine that provided radia- tion therapy to cancer victims, but occasionally killed them with massive overdoses due to a software race condition. A further example of a dozen years ago (August 2004) involved a single faulty command to a computer system used by United and American Airlines that grounded the entire ﬂeet of both companies—and all their passengers! It is a certainty that we’ll all one day be at the mercy of critical computer systems designed by you and your classmates. So we really hope that you’ll develop the ability to formulate rock-solid logical arguments that a system actually does what you think it should do! 1.10 References [14], [1], [49], [18], [22] “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 20 — #28 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 20 Problems for Section 1.1 Class Problems Problem 1.1. The Pythagorean Theorem says that if a and b are the lengths of the sides of a right triangle, and c is the length of its hypotenuse, then a2 C b2 D c2: This theorem is so fundamental and familiar that we generally take it for granted. But just being familiar doesn’t justify calling it “obvious”—witness the fact that people have felt the need to devise different proofs of it for milllenia.7 In this problem we’ll examine a particularly simple “proof without words” of the theorem. Here’s the strategy. Suppose you are given four different colored copies of a right triangle with sides of lengths a, b and c, along with a suitably sized square, as shown in Figure 1.1. c b a Figure 1.1 Right triangles and square. (a) You will ﬁrst arrange the square and four triangles so they form a c c square. From this arrangement you will see that the square is .b   a/  .b   a/. (b) You will then arrange the same shapes so they form two squares, one a  a and the other b  b. 7Over a hundred different proofs are listed on the mathematics website http://www.cut-the- knot.org/pythagoras/. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 21 — #29 1.10. References 21 You know that the area of an s s square is s2. So appealing to the principle that Area is Preserved by Rearranging, you can now conclude that a2 C b2 D c2, as claimed. This really is an elegant and convincing proof of the Pythagorean Theorem, but it has some worrisome features. One concern is that there might be something special about the shape of these particular triangles and square that makes the rearranging possible—for example, suppose a D b? (c) How would you respond to this concern? (d) Another concern is that a number of facts about right triangles, squares and lines are being implicitly assumed in justifying the rearrangements into squares. Enumerate some of these assumed facts. Problem 1.2. What’s going on here?! 1 D p 1 D p . 1/. 1/ D p  1 p  1 D p  1 2 D  1: (a) Precisely identify and explain the mistake(s) in this bogus proof. (b) Prove (correctly) that if 1 D  1, then 2 D 1. (c) Every positive real number r has two square roots, one positive and the other negative. The standard convention is that the expression pr refers to the positive square root of r. Assuming familiar properties of multiplication of real numbers, prove that for positive real numbers r and s, prs D prps: (1.7) Problem 1.3. Identify exactly where the bugs are in each of the following bogus proofs.8 (a) Bogus Claim: 1=8 > 1=4: 8From [48], Twenty Years Before the Blackboard by Michael Stueben and Diane Sandford “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 22 — #30 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 22 Bogus proof. 3 > 2 3 log10.1=2/ > 2 log10.1=2/ log10.1=2/3 > log10.1=2/2 .1=2/3 > .1=2/2; and the claim now follows by the rules for multiplying fractions.  (b) Bogus proof: 1¢ D $0:01 D .$0:1/2 D .10¢/2 D 100¢ D $1:  (c) Bogus Claim: If a and b are two equal real numbers, then a D 0. Bogus proof. a D b a2 D ab a2   b2 D ab   b2 .a   b/.a C b/ D .a   b/b a C b D b a D 0:  Problem 1.4. It’s a fact that the Arithmetic Mean is at least as large as the Geometric Mean, namely, a C b 2  p ab for all nonnegative real numbers a and b. But there’s something objectionable about the following proof of this fact. What’s the objection, and how would you ﬁx it? “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 23 — #31 1.10. References 23 Bogus proof. a C b 2 ‹ p ab; so a C b ‹ 2 p ab; so a2 C 2ab C b2 ‹ 4ab; so a2   2ab C b2 ‹ 0; so .a   b/2  0 which we know is true. The last statement is true because a   b is a real number, and the square of a real number is never negative. This proves the claim.  Problem 1.5. Albert announces to his class that he plans to surprise them with a quiz sometime next week. His students ﬁrst wonder if the quiz could be on Friday of next week. They reason that it can’t: if Albert didn’t give the quiz before Friday, then by midnight Thursday, they would know the quiz had to be on Friday, and so the quiz wouldn’t be a surprise any more. Next the students wonder whether Albert could give the surprise quiz Thursday. They observe that if the quiz wasn’t given before Thursday, it would have to be given on the Thursday, since they already know it can’t be given on Friday. But having ﬁgured that out, it wouldn’t be a surprise if the quiz was on Thursday either. Similarly, the students reason that the quiz can’t be on Wednesday, Tuesday, or Monday. Namely, it’s impossible for Albert to give a surprise quiz next week. All the students now relax, having concluded that Albert must have been blufﬁng. And since no one expects the quiz, that’s why, when Albert gives it on Tuesday next week, it really is a surprise! What, if anything, do you think is wrong with the students’ reasoning? Problems for Section 1.5 Homework Problems Problem 1.6. Show that log7 n is either an integer or irrational, where n is a positive integer. Use “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 24 — #32 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 24 whatever familiar facts about integers and primes you need, but explicitly state such facts. Problems for Section 1.7 Practice Problems Problem 1.7. Prove by cases that max.r; s/ C min.r; s/ D r C s (*) for all real numbers r; s. Class Problems Problem 1.8. If we raise an irrational number to an irrational power, can the result be rational? Show that it can by considering p 2 p 2 and arguing by cases. Problem 1.9. Prove by cases that jr C sj  jrj C jsj (1) for all real numbers r; s.9 Homework Problems Problem 1.10. (a) Suppose that a C b C c D d; where a; b; c; d are nonnegative integers. Let P be the assertion that d is even. Let W be the assertion that exactly one among a; b; c are even, and let T be the assertion that all three are even. Prove by cases that P IFF ŒW OR T : 9The absolute value jrj of r equals whichever of r or  r is not negative. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 25 — #33 1.10. References 25 (b) Now suppose that w2 C x2 C y2 D z2; where w; x; y; z are nonnegative integers. Let P be the assertion that z is even, and let R be the assertion that all three of w; x; y are even. Prove by cases that P IFF R: Hint: An odd number equals 2m C 1 for some integer m, so its square equals 4.m2 C m/ C 1. Exam Problems Problem 1.11. Prove that there is an irrational number a such that a p 3 is rational. Hint: Consider 3p 2 p 3 and argue by cases. Problems for Section 1.8 Practice Problems Problem 1.12. Prove that for any n > 0, if an is even, then a is even. Hint: Contradiction. Problem 1.13. Prove that if a  b D n, then either a or b must be  pn, where a; b, and n are nonnegative real numbers. Hint: by contradiction, Section 1.8. Problem 1.14. Let n be a nonnegative integer. (a) Explain why if n2 is even—that is, a multiple of 2—then n is even. (b) Explain why if n2 is a multiple of 3, then n must be a multiple of 3. Problem 1.15. Give an example of two distinct positive integers m; n such that n2 is a multiple of “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 26 — #34 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 26 m, but n is not a multiple of m. How about having m be less than n? Class Problems Problem 1.16. How far can you generalize the proof of Theorem 1.8.1 that p 2 is irrational? For example, how about p 3? Problem 1.17. Prove that log4 6 is irrational. Problem 1.18. Prove by contradiction that p 3 C p 2 is irrational. Hint: . p 3 C p 2/. p 3  p 2/ Problem 1.19. Here is a generalization of Problem 1.16 that you may not have thought of: Lemma. Let the coefﬁcients of the polynomial a0 C a1x C a2x2 C    C am 1xm 1 C xm be integers. Then any real root of the polynomial is either integral or irrational. (a) Explain why the Lemma immediately implies that mp k is irrational whenever k is not an mth power of some integer. (b) Carefully prove the Lemma. You may ﬁnd it helpful to appeal to: Fact. If a prime p is a factor of some power of an integer, then it is a factor of that integer. You may assume this Fact without writing down its proof, but see if you can explain why it is true. Exam Problems Problem 1.20. Prove that log9 12 is irrational. “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 27 — #35 1.10. References 27 Problem 1.21. Prove that log12 18 is irrational. Problem 1.22. A familiar proof that 3p 72 is irrational depends on the fact that a certain equation among those below is unsatisﬁable by integers a; b > 0. (Note that more than one is unsatisﬁable, but only one of them is relevant.) Indicate the equation that would appear in the proof, and explain why it is unsatisﬁable. (Do not assume that 3p 72 is irrational.) i. a2 D 72 C b2 ii. a3 D 72 C b3 iii. a2 D 72b2 iv. a3 D 72b3 v. a3 D 73b3 vi. .ab/3 D 72 Homework Problems Problem 1.23. The fact that that there are irrational numbers a; b such that ab is rational was proved in Problem 1.8 by cases. Unfortunately, that proof was nonconstructive: it didn’t reveal a speciﬁc pair a; b with this property. But in fact, it’s easy to do this: let a WWD p 2 and b WWD 2 log2 3. We know a D p 2 is irrational, and ab D 3 by deﬁnition. Finish the proof that these values for a; b work, by showing that 2 log2 3 is irrational. Problem 1.24. Here is a different proof that p 2 is irrational, taken from the American Mathemat- ical Monthly, v.116, #1, Jan. 2009, p.69: Proof. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that p 2 is rational, and choose the least integer q > 0 such that p 2   1  q is a nonnegative integer. Let q0 WWD p 2   1  q. Clearly 0 < q0 < q. But an easy computation shows that p 2   1  q0 is a nonnegative integer, contradicting the minimality of q.  “mcs” — 2018/6/6 — 13:43 — page 28 — #36 Chapter 1 What is a Proof? 28 (a) This proof was written for an audience of college teachers, and at this point it is a little more concise than desirable. Write out a more complete version which includes an explanation of each step. (b) Now that you have justiﬁed the steps in this proof, do you have a preference for one of these proofs over the other? Why? Discuss these questions with your teammates for a few minutes and summarize your team’s answers on your white- board. Problem 1.25. For n D 40, the value of polynomial p.n/ WWD n2 C n C 41 is not prime, as noted in Section 1.1. But we could have predicted based on general principles that no nonconstant polynomial can generate only prime numbers. In particular, let q.n/ be a polynomial with integer coefﬁcients, and let c WW
