---
id: 780
url: https://mecha.so/comet#overview
title: Mecha Comet - Modular Linux Handheld Computer | Mecha
domain: mecha.so
source_date: '2026-01-29'
tags:
- devops
- cli-tool
- gaming
summary: The Mecha Comet is an open-source, modular Linux handheld computer currently
  on Kickstarter, featuring a 3.92" AMOLED display, ARM64 processor, and customizable
  extensions like keyboards, modems, and AI accelerators. Designed for developers,
  tinkerers, and enthusiasts, it runs Mechanix OS (based on Linux 6.12) and supports
  67,000+ ARM packages, enabling diverse use cases from retro gaming and productivity
  to robotics, networking, and DIY projects. The device emphasizes repairability,
  modularity, and open-source software with a 7-year support promise.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Mecha Comet - Modular Linux Handheld Computer | Mecha

The Mecha Comet is now live on Kickstarter Campaign ends in 00 Days 00 Hours 00 Minutes 00 Seconds For the love of computing Mecha Comet, handheld Linux computer that's truly yours to own, build and mod. Comet on Kickstarter Join the 16,000+ builders for the geeks, by the geeks and of the geeks Processor Storage Display Battery More 4-Core, ARM64 Up to 1.8 GHz, A53 Cores Integrated GPU & NPU 6-Core, ARM64 Up to 1.8 GHz, A55 Cores Integrated GPU & NPU 2x Faster GPU LPDDR5 Specifications Datasheet Developer Documentation Operating System Mechanix OS (Linux 6.12) CPU I.MX8M Plus (4–Cores A53), I.MX 95 (6–Cores A55) Memory 2 GB, 4 GB, 8 GB Storage 64 GB, 128 GB Flash (eMMC) Wireless 2.4 GHz/5.0 GHz 802.11ac, BT 5.4, Physical SIM card Display 3.92" AMOLED Display (550 nits), Capacitive Touch PCIe PCIe 3.0 (1x, B-Key) Camera 8 MP (with Auto-focus) Audio 2x Digital Mic, HD Speaker Power 4100 mAh Battery, Type-C (5V) Ports 1x HDMI, 2x USB C Peripherals 9-Axis Motion Sensor, RTC, ADC Security Trust Anchor (CC EAL 6+) Dimensions 155 x 73 x 14 mm (225g) Datasheet Developer Documentation Documentation Comet Extensions Keyboard RGB Backlit QMK Compatible HD Trackpad 3D Printable & Swappable Keys Gamepad Dual D-pad In-built trackpad Programmable buttons GPIO Serial Console over USB In-built CAN Bus General Purpose, DIY-ready View Specs View 3D Keyboard RGB Backlit QMK Compatible HD Trackpad 3D Printable & Swappable Keys How do extensions work? The Comet has these 40 IO pins that can enable a lot more functionality than what's already onboard. This part is all-magnetic, so you can simply snap your extension off and on and it is pretty tight too. and... can I make my own extensions? All our standard extensions are open-hardware. We give you all the resources to build your own extensions and help you out too! Simply ask. Docs + Pin Diagram github/mecha-org M.2 3042, B-Key PCle 3.0 1x, USB 3.0 Modular on the outside, and inside LTE or 5G Modems Add mobile data and calling support to your Comet. Bring your own modem and antenna or use our standard LTE upgrade kit. 4G Network Calling and SMS Mobile data NVMe SSD Using a B-key to M-key adapter you can attach any 2230 M.2 SSD to expand storage up to 2TB. 400-600 mbps read/write speeds Open-hardware B-Key to M-key LoRa and Meshtastic Bring LoRa radios on M.2 for de-centralized p2p communication with Meshtastic, provisions available for external antennas. Planned with M262X840XE Ai Accelerator Accelerated computer vision upto 13 TOPS, use for object detection, pattern recognition and robotics. In testing FPGA Support Build your own hardware accelerated stack with FPGAs modules for the Comet. Planned Mechanix OS Our graphical shell designed for the Comet's unique form factor powered by the GPU. Home screen App Drawer App Switcher Lockscreen Native apps The Comet ships with essential native apps built with Flutter for buttery-smooth performance. repo/mechanix-gui Files Camera Music Notes Now let's talk firmware U-Boot 2025.04 Repo Linux 6.12 Repo Fedora 43 The Comet-M is powered by Linux, flavoured with our custom distro - Mechanix . The bootloader, kernel and rootfs is open-source and you are welcome to customize. Mecha open-source We believe that only open-source software can drive computing further and we would like to play our part. github/mecha-org Mechanix GUI GPU powered desktop shell, services and native apps for Linux on the handheld Rust Mechanix Dart GUI toolkit for Flutter based on our design system that powers our native apps. Dart Mecha Make Image build systems and tools for the Mecha Comet If it runs on Linux, it runs on Comet The Comet can run anything that's built for ARM, that's 67000+ packages in the Fedora's repositories. Built by the community, one for all and all for one The Comet is built for everyone, including every app, distribution and OS. What could you build with the Comet? Native Experiences Retro Gaming Powerhouse Relive the classics or play indie games. The Comet handles it all with ease, from 8-bit to 32-bit. GAMING Productivity Suite Native notes and files apps that are offline-first and lightning fast. Capture thoughts instantly. PRODUCTIVITY Inbult Music Player A dedicated music experience. Your library, your formats, no subscriptions required. MEDIA Modular Inputs Swap the keyboard for a gamepad or a custom controller in seconds. Hardware that adapts to you. HARDWARE System Control Granular control over your device. Customize performance, hardware control, and UX to your exact needs. SYSTEM DIY Smartphone A fully functional phone stack. Calls, SMS, and data on an open platform. Plasma Mobile ready. COMMUNICATION Networking, Security, Communication Terminal on the move If you are managing remote servers or your home-lab, use the Comet as your perfect remote terminal. Install Tailscale or VPN of your choice and setup your remote access tools. DEVOPS, DEVS Network Diagnostics If you are an IT Admin, use the Comet on the field or in datacenters, troubleshoot networking issues on the move. Get Gigabit ethernet via USB 3.0 adapters. NETWORKING Cybersecurity Toolkit Run Kali-style setups, network scanners, and protocol analyzers on the move. Plug into networks or test rigs and capture traffic, fuzz endpoints, and demo exploits without a laptop. With great power comes great responsibility. NETWORKING, SECURITY Communication DIY Phone Use the Comet and the Linux stack for calling*, messaging and mobile data as an alternate to your walled and closed smartphone. Contribute to the Linux ecosystem for mobiles. * No earpiece but the front speaker can do the trick. LINUX USERS, DEVS, TINKERERS Go-off the Grid Exchange GPS coordinates, weather data, and text messages across dozens of kilometers using long-range, low-power mesh protocols. Bring LoRa support via the M.2 slot, and setup your own Meshtastic node. HIKERS, CAMPERS Handheld for SDR Scan spectrum, decode signals, and prototype RF applications from wherever you are. Add SDR support via RTL-SDR or the M.2 Slot HAM RADIO OPERATORS Tinkering & Self-hosting Pocket Tinkering Lab The Comet with the IO Breakout extension is your pocket home-lab for all your electronic experiments. Build home projects with sensors, controllers and hone your tinkering skills. Access 9 different IO interfaces on the IO breakout's 40-pins. LINUX USERS, DEVS Self-hosting in your pocket Set up your private self-hosting lab, host your photo libraries, intranet applications, media and music library and carry it with you wherever you go. Expand your storage with NVMe or SD Cards to get more out of the Comet HIKERS, CAMPERS Learn Linux Practically Understand how Linux and its internals work. Master distributions and user-space applications for Linux. Port user-space applications. Learn with building. Build applications, port community software for the Comet. DEVS, GAMING, TINKERERS Hardware programming Real time OS Use the Comet with Preempt RT Linux for real-time IO with deterministic timings and low-latency applications. Or work with RTOS in the secondary MCU (Cortex M7) for hybrid applications with MCU+MPU usage. AUTOMATION Driver Development Integrate new hardware, build, test with validate with the vast IOs available on the external and internal. Use the IO breakout ext for prototyping, and debug with UART and JTAG. HARDWARE DESIGN ROS2+Computer Vision Put your robotics project in top gear with ROS2 and accelerated computer vision for navigation, obstacle-detection and recognition. Use the onboard NPU (2 TOPs) or the Hailo 8L on M.2 for 13 TOPs. ROBOTICS For-profit and for-good, hand in hand 7 years of software & spares support promise At Mecha, we are set on a course to build an open source and inclusive computing platform that inspires you to innovate and explore. Longevity is not an afterthought for us. The Comet is designed to be repairable and moddable from the start. Mechanical drawings and 3D CAD available Customize and 3D print your own parts. Your device, your rules. STEP Files PCB Schematics & layout available* Make your own repairs or replacements. We're not gatekeeping the mainboard design. Schematics Reasonably Priced Spares Parts are available to buy from us and stocked to ensure long-term availability. Docs Repair that a 10-year old could do We have taken care in the design to make it easy to fix things & re-assemble on your own. Repair docs * PCB source files will be published once the Comet enters mass-production Our journey building the Comet Four years in the making. Here's what's next → Kickstarter Launch Launch our crowdfunding campaign to bring Comet to makers worldwide. Early bird pricing and exclusive backer rewards. Jan 2026 Certifications Final regulatory approvals and compliance testing. Q1 2026 Mass Production Full-scale manufacturing begins. Comets start rolling off the assembly line. Q2 2026 First Shipments Comets start arriving at doorsteps around the world. Q2 2026 Built by tinkerers. Just like you We've been featured in a few places "Mecha Comet is a modular open source handheld computer that reminds me of the Indian PDA that may have inspired the iPhone" TechRadar Wayne Williams "It's so customizable that it comes with an Allen wrench in the chassis." Engadget Jessica Conditt "The possibilities for a pocketable Linux computer like the Comet are practically endless." Tom's Hardware Avram Piltch "I Was Never More Excited to Work and Play on This 3.4″ Display" How to Geek Dibakar Ghosh "There are no walled gardens with this little computer... Exactly what you do is between you and your imagination" Hackster.io Nick Bild Join the Revolución Community Forums Ask questions, post your feedback, and be a part of the Mecha community. We would love to see you there. ✨ Collaborate on projects 💬 Share Feedback Go to Forums Reach us, instantly IM with our team & users, disrupt everything, and build something new out of the blue! Discord https://discord.gg/VGrZNFPycX Mecha Docs Resources and guides for Mecha hardwa
