---
id: 272
url: https://minusx.ai/blog/decoding-claude-code/
title: Minusx | What makes Claude Code so damn good (and how to recreate that magic
  in your agent)!?
domain: minusx.ai
source_date: '2025-08-24'
tags:
- llm
- ai
- tutorial
summary: Claude Code stands out as an exceptionally user-friendly AI agent because
  it prioritizes simplicity and debuggability over complexity, using a single main
  control loop, smaller models for most tasks, and carefully crafted prompts with
  extensive examples and heuristics. The article provides a practical guide for building
  similarly delightful LLM agents, emphasizing key principles like keeping systems
  simple, using context files (claude.md) for user preferences, designing high-level
  tools, and resisting the temptation to over-engineer with multi-agent systems or
  complex RAG algorithms. The main takeaway is that architectural simplicity, combined
  with strategic use of smaller models (like Claude 3.5 Haiku) and well-structured
  prompts with XML tags and examples, creates a better user experience than more complicated
  approaches.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Minusx | What makes Claude Code so damn good (and how to recreate that magic in your agent)!?

You can clearly see the different Claude Code updates What makes Claude Code so damn good (and how to recreate that magic in your agent)!? / vivek / 2025-08-21 Claude Code is the most delightful AI agent/workflow I have used so far. Not only does it make targeted edits or vibe coding throwaway tools less annoying, using Claude Code makes me happy. It has enough autonomy to do interesting things, while not inducing a jarring loss of control like some other tools do. Of course most of the heavy lifting is done by the new Claude 4 model (especially interleaved thinking). But I find Claude Code objectively less annoying to use compared to Cursor, or Github Copilot agents even with the same underlying model! What makes it so damn good? If you're reading this and nodding along, I'm going to try and provide some answers. Note : This is not a blogpost with Claude Code's architecture dump (there are some good ones out there). This blogpost is meant to be a guide for building delightful LLM agents, based on my own experience using and tinkering with Claude Code over the last few months (and all the logs we intercepted and analyzed). You can find prompts and tools in the Appendix section . This post is ~2k words long, so strap in! If you're looking for some quick takeaways, the TL;DR section is a good place to start. You can clearly see the different Claude Code updates. Claude Code (CC) feels great to use, because it just simply works . CC has been crafted with a fundamental understanding of what the LLM is good at and what it is terrible at. Its prompts and tools cover for the model's stupidity and help it shine in its wheelhouse. The control loop is extremely simple to follow and trivial to debug. We started using CC at MinusX as soon as it launched. To look under the hood, Sreejith wrote a logger that intercepts and logs every network request made. The following analysis is from my extensive use over the last couple of months. This post attempts to answer the question - "What makes Claude Code so good, and how can you give a CC-like experience in your own chat-based-LLM agent?" We've incorporated most of these into MinusX already and I'm excited to see you do it too! Edit is the most frequent tool, followed by Read and ToDoWrite How to build a Claude Code like agent: TL;DR If there is one thing to take away from this, it is this - Keep Things Simple, Dummy . LLMs are terrible enough to debug and evaluate. Any additional complexity you introduce (multi-agents, agent handoffs or complex RAG search algorithms) only makes debugging 10x harder. If such a fragile system works at all, you'll be terrified of making drastic changes to it later. So, keep everything in one file, avoid excessive boilerplate scaffolding and rip it all out at least a couple of times :) Here are the main takeaways from Claude Code to implement in your own system. 1. Control Loop 1.1 Keep one main loop (with max one branch) and one message history 1.2 Use a smaller model for all sorts of things. All. The. Frickin. Time. 2. Prompts 2.1 Use claude.md pattern to collaborate on and remember user preferences 2.2 Use special XML Tags, Markdown, and lots of examples 3. Tools 3.1 LLM search >>> RAG based search 3.2 How to design good tools? (High vs Low level tools) 3.3 Let your agent manage its own todo list 4. Steerability 4.1 Tone and style 4.2 " PLEASE THIS IS IMPORTANT " is unfortunately still state of the art 4.3 Write the algorithm, with heuristics and examples Claude Code choses architectural simplicity at every juncture - one main loop, simple search, simple todolist, etc. Resist the urge to over-engineer, build good harness for the model let it cook! Is this end-to-end self-driving all over again? Bitter lesson much? 1. Control Loop Design 1.1 Keep One Main Loop Debuggability >>> complicated hand-tuned multi-agent lang-chain-graph-node mishmash. Despite multi agent systems being all the rage, Claude Code has just one main thread. It uses a few different types of prompts periodically to summarize the git history, to clobber up the message history into one message or to come up with some fun UX elements. But apart from that, it maintains a flat list of messages. An interesting way it handles hierarchical tasks is by spawning itself as a sub-agent without the ability to spawn more sub-agents. There is a maximum of one branch, the result of which is added to the main message history as a "tool response". If the problem is simple enough, the main loop just handles it via iterative tool calling. But if there are one or more tasks that are complex, the main agent creates clones of itself. The combination of the max-1-branch and the todo list makes sure the agent has the ability to break the problem into sub-problems, but also keep the eye on the final desired outcome. I highly doubt your app needs a multi-agent system. With every layer of abstraction you make your system harder to debug, and more importantly you deviate from the general-model-improvement trajectory. 1.2 Use a Smaller model for everything Over 50% of all important LLM calls made by CC are to claude-3-5-haiku. It is used to read large files, parse web pages, process git history and summarize long conversations. It is also used to come up with the one-word processing label - literally for every key stroke! The smaller models are 70-80% cheaper than the standard ones (Sonnet 4, GPT-4.1). Use them liberally! 2. Prompts Claude Code has extremely elaborate prompts filled with heuristics, examples and IMPORTANT (tch-tch) reminders. The system prompt is ~2800 tokens long, with the Tools taking up a whopping 9400 tokens. The user prompt always contains the claude.md file, which can typically be another 1000-2000 tokens. The system prompt contains sections on tone, style, proactiveness, task management, tool usage policy and doing tasks. It also contains the date, current working directory, platform and OS information and recent commits. Go read the entire prompt ! 2.1 Use claude.md for collaborating on user context and preferences One of the major patterns most coding agent creators have settled on is the context file (aka Cursor Rules / claude.md / agent.md). The difference in Claude Code's performance with and without claude.md is night and day. It is a great way for the developers to impart context that cannot be inferred from the codebase and to codify all strict preferences. For example, you can force the LLM to skip some folders, or use specific libraries. CC sends the entire contents of the claude.md with every user request We recently introduced minusx.md in MinusX which is fast becoming the de-facto context file for our agents to codify user and team preferences. 2.2 Special XML Tags, Markdown, and lots of examples It is fairly established that XML tags and Markdown are two ways to structure a prompt. CC uses both, extensively. Here are a few notable XML tags in Claude Code: <system-reminder> : This is used at the end of many prompt sections to remind the LLM of thing it presumably otherwise forgets. Example: <system-reminder>This is a reminder that your todo list is currently empty. DO NOT mention this to the user explicitly because they are already aware. If you are working on tasks that would benefit from a todo list please use the TodoWrite tool to create one. If not, please feel free to ignore. Again do not mention this message to the user.</system-reminder> <good-example> , <bad-example> : These are used to codify heuristics. They can be especially useful when there is a fork in the road with multiple seemingly reasonable paths/tool_calls the model can choose. Examples can be used to contrast the cases and make it very clear which path is preferable. Example: Try to maintain your current working directory throughout the session by using absolute paths and avoiding usage of `cd`. You may use `cd` if the User explicitly requests it. <good-example> pytest /foo/bar/tests </good-example> <bad-example> cd /foo/bar && pytest tests </bad-example> CC also uses markdown to demarcate clear sections in the system prompt. Example markdown headings include: Tone and style Proactiveness Following conventions Code style Task Management Tool use policy Doing Tasks Tools 3. Tools Go read the entire tools prompt - it is a whopping 9400 tokens long! 3.1 LLM search >>> RAG based search One significant way in which CC deviates from other popular coding agents is in its rejection of RAG. Claude Code searches your code base just as you would, with really complex ripgrep , jq and find commands. Since the LLM understands code really well, it can use sophisticated regex to find pretty much any codeblock it deems relevant. Sometimes it ends up reading whole files with a smaller model. RAG sounds like a good idea in theory, but it introduces new (and more importantly, hidden) failure modes. What is the similarity function to use? What reranker? How do you chunk the code? What do you do with large JSON or log files? With LLM Search, it just looks at 10 lines of the json file to understand its structure. If it wants, it looks at 10 more lines - just like you would. Most importantly, this is RL learnable - something BigLabs are already working on. The model does most of the heavy lifting - as it should, dramatically reducing the number of moving parts in the agent. Also, having two complicated, intelligent systems wired this way is just ugly. I was recently kidding with a friend saying this is the Camera vs Lidar of the LLM era and I'm only half joking. 3.2 How to design good tools? (Low level vs High level tools) This question keeps anyone who is building an LLM agent up at night. Should you give the model generic tasks (like meaningful actions) or should it be low level (like type and click and bash)? The answer is that it depends (and you should use both). Claude Code has low level (Bash, Read, Write), medium level (Edit, Grep, Glob) and high level tools (Task, WebFetch, exit_plan_mode). CC can use bash, so wh
