---
id: 324
url: https://vurt.org/articles/my-favourite-german-word/
title: My favourite German word - Daniele Procida
domain: vurt.org
source_date: '2025-07-22'
tags:
- ai
- web-dev
summary: Daniele Procida explores the German word "Gegenstand" (object/thing, literally
  "stand-against") to argue why high-quality documentation and information architecture
  still matter in an age of AI and customized answers. He contends that objects, knowledge,
  and information must maintain their own integrity and resistance—they shouldn't
  be over-fitted to individual desires—because this resistance is what gives us structure,
  shared understanding, and meaningful encounters with reality. Just as good design
  requires a balance between fit and resistance, good documentation should resist
  the temptation to be entirely tailored and instead maintain its own rational organization,
  which paradoxically leads to richer, more unexpected learning experiences.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# My favourite German word - Daniele Procida

My favourite German word ¶ 30th June 2025 A documentation colleague recently challenged me with a question: Nowadays, more and more people reach for an LLM tool to provide the information they want. If human beings don’t actually read it, what is the point of writing and structuring documentation for humans? Newer generations (she said) are becoming unskilled at finding information for themselves. They seem less able to digest what they find, to apply it to their problems. But it’s not just that: everybody seems to expect answers that are closely tailored to their particular situation, level of understanding and so on, and to get the answers now . And, many of them are willing to give up guarantees of quality and reliability in exchange of ease-of-use and customised responses. So why should we take painstaking care in the creation of high-quality documentation? A lot of recent discussion in documentation circles and forums has swirled uneasily around these topics. A popular and gloomy version of my colleague’s line of thought is: “What is the point of my job?” Good question. Gegenstand ¶ My favourite word in the German language is Gegenstand , for object or thing . Gegenstand , “stand-against”. An object is something that stands against you. It’s not you. It’s outside you. It has its own rules. It doesn’t conform to your desires. You run up against it, and it resists. Objects aren’t just inert stuff – they do something. Even better, Gegenstand shows how objects help define us . I know what I am, what the limits of myself are, because I am able to come up against resistant objects. That’s how I know and have a sense of my own body, its extension in space, where it ends and where the world begins. I am able to have a self in the first place only because the world of objects is there to stand against me. The nature of things ¶ Gegenstand gives objects and reality a kind of integrity. I have to respect them. They do not yield to my will just because I want them to. They have a nature that belongs to them. If I want to do something with them, I’m going to have to work on their terms to do it. Reality’s resistance is what makes it possible to work with things at all. Every tool and machine that ever existed worked by being a stubbornly resistant Gegenstand . Shared reality ¶ A Gegenstand is an object for me - an object of my experience. But objects are objects for everyone. They are there to stand against everybody . It’s not just that we have a shared experience of objects – our experience and knowledge of each other is also only possible because we inhabit a world of shared objects to stand against. Design, fit and resistance ¶ Good design is magnificent because it takes resistant materials, unyielding constraints, and successfully gives them a form that works for us. It’s a pleasure to pick up something – a knife, a camera, anything – that simultaneously fits and resists the hand, in just the right ways. Good clothes fit and resist the body. The pleasure is not just in the fitting, but in the fitting and resistance. Bad design ¶ Something that resists unpleasantly , like an uncomfortable chair, is bad design. It only resists, and fails to fit. (We have enough of those things in our lives.) But, bad design is also when things are made to fit too much . In the 1980s, a strange thing started to happen to physical products, and continues today. The idea that objects should fit to human needs began to be interpreted as meaning that they should literally fit the shape of the hand . Parts of everyday products – on bicycles, umbrellas, cameras – were increasingly given hand-shaped grips . A camera today will often have a grip closely contoured to the fingers of the hand. In one way this does make the camera easier to hold – but literally only in one way . Only with the right hand, and only in one particular way, so tough luck if that doesn’t suit you – for example if you have a physical disability. Holding it any other way (and there are many good ways of holding a camera) is made more difficult, unsafe and uncomfortable. (Similarly, the asymmetric computer mice that became popular a couple of decades ago were as unpleasant in the left hand as a shoe on the wrong foot.) These objects are over-fitted . Servile objects ¶ Our hands, that evolved over millions of years, can hold almost any suitably-sized object safely and comfortably. Things don’t need to be specially fitted to the hand; our hands are happy to meet and hold anything that doesn’t actively resist them. In fact, they don’t want objects to be over-fitted. Over-fitted objects are servile . They have a creepy character. They are craven and eager to please, and give up their own confidence of form, that would allow us, with our splendidly adaptive hands, to hold them in multiple different ways. Their design doesn’t actually help us. It looks like the object has been designed to fit to the needs of the hand, but in fact it’s a false friend – it’s the hand that is obliged to conform to the object’s single idea of how it should be held. People ¶ The same principles apply to our relationships with people. People must be Gegenstände , who stand against you because they have their own integrity, and do not conform to what you want just because you want it. A friend is a person who fits and resists in the right way, someone you can stand against to measure yourself by them. A friend is not someone who only fits. Like an object that relinquishes its own integrity, a person who moulds themselves against you is creepy - a false friend. Knowledge and information ¶ Knowledge and information are Gegenstände too. They have their own rules. Integrity and resistance to our will are part of their nature. When they fit our needs, we are delighted – but if they become servile, made to conform to what we want them to be, they lose their worth. A news source that only tells us what we want to hear is as dangerous and treacherous as a person who does. Sometimes we might not want them to, but we need knowledge and information to stand against us, as objective things, so we can have a healthy relationship with them. Information in space ¶ Because they are Gegenstände , our relationship with them is spatial . We ask where information is, and we organise it in space. It’s not a coincidence or metaphor that we use the language of searching and finding, or that we have concepts like information architecture. In the history of the world, every library has had an information architecture , and a librarian to maintain it. Information architecture organises knowledge in an information space, in which everything has a place, and places all knowledge in relation to other knowledge – in spatial relations, of hierarchy, opposition, distance, closeness and adjacency, of intersection and overlap. It’s not merely an arrangement applied to knowledge: the organisation of knowledge is part of knowledge itself . It’s also part of our own relationship with knowledge. Many people still know, decades after their studies, exactly where in a book some important material is to be found. Everything in my own university library was in a place, a hierarchy of floors and sections and shelves, and that’s how I knew it. I moved around, in the information. Its structure was its own, an active, rational principle of organisation. It wasn’t always what I wanted or convenient for me, but it was a structure, that I had to understand so that I could navigate it, to find the knowledge where it was. If I wanted something from the library, I had to work on the library’s terms to get it. Experiences of knowledge ¶ Because of the library’s rational hierarchical structure of information, I had many experiences of knowledge . Adjacent knowledge; I would discover something important because I was physically near the the thing I was looking for. Surprise knowledge. Knowledge encountered on the way to something else. Sometimes, knowledge that threw a spanner in the works and that I wasn’t pleased to find but couldn’t ignore. Experience in knowledge ¶ The handbook I was given to accompany the introductory five-day Python/Django course I took in 2009 served as my first port of call for Python reference for the next few years. It was open permanently on my desk and I used it daily in my work. It wasn’t successful in that role because it had an ideal information structure. In fact it didn’t; as a workbook for a course, it took a linear path, more adapted to a learner’s progression than to being used as a reference guide. It succeeded because it had a definite information structure, rational and clear enough that I could find my place and make my way in it. To become an effective user of it, I had to come to terms with it, and acquire a mental model of its arrangement. Our brains are as adaptable to different shapes as our hands, and the handbook was comfortably usable in that way. Its structure didn’t just permit me to find the information I needed in effective ways. It asserted relationships (of dependency, consequence, progression, hierarchy) within the knowledge it contained. It was an inextricable element of my relationship with it; as far as I was concerned, part of the information itself. Diminished powers ¶ As a university teacher a long time ago, I observed at first hand how students discovered knowledge, and saw how it changed when the web came along. I saw that students who had learned to find information by searching through card indexes and other tools that asserted the whereness of information were much more effective discoverers than the ones for whom web search was their starting point. I don’t mean they were more effective in using things like card indexes – I mean that they were better at looking for knowledge in general , and in particular, also better at using the web to search for it. The strategies and execution of their searching were more sophisticated. Their judgements were more critical. They were able to articul
