---
id: 791
url: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2026/02/02/opinion/ai-future-leading-thinkers-survey.html
title: Opinion | Where Is A.I. Taking Us? Eight Leading Thinkers Share Their Visions.
  - The New York Times
domain: www.nytimes.com
source_date: '2026-02-02'
tags:
- ai
- news
- llm
summary: Eight leading AI experts share their predictions for the next five years,
  with views ranging from cautiously optimistic to skeptical about transformative
  breakthroughs. While AI is expected to substantially impact programming, transportation,
  and scientific research, experts warn that the technology won't imminently solve
  major challenges like cancer or achieve artificial general intelligence, and that
  thoughtful governance will be crucial to maximizing benefits while mitigating risks.
  The consensus suggests AI will become increasingly integrated into everyday tools
  and work, but its most significant impacts will depend on how society chooses to
  deploy and regulate it rather than on the technology itself.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Opinion | Where Is A.I. Taking Us? Eight Leading Thinkers Share Their Visions. - The New York Times

Opinion Where Is A.I. Taking Us? Where Is A.I. Taking Us? Eight Leading Thinkers Share Their Visions. Timo Lenzen for The New York Times Share full article 880 People have been working on artificial intelligence for decades. But five years ago, few were predicting that A.I. would break through as the most important technology story of the 2020s — and quite possibly the century. Large language models have turned A.I. into a household topic, but all areas of A.I. have taken great leaps forward. Now, we are inundated with chatter about how much A.I. will transform our lives and our world. Already, companies are trying to find ways to offload tasks and even entire jobs to A.I. More people are turning to A.I. for social interaction and mental health support. Educators are scrambling to manage students’ increased reliance on these tools. And in the near future A.I. may lead to breakthroughs in drug discovery and energy; it could allow more people to create art and cultural works — or turn these industries into slop factories. As society wrestles with whether A.I. will lead us into a better future or catastrophic one, Times Opinion turned to eight experts for their predictions on where A.I. may go in the next five years. Listening to them may help us bring out the best and mitigate the worst out of this new technology. Participants Melanie Mitchell Computer scientist and professor at the Santa Fe Institute Yuval Noah Harari Historian, philosopher and author Carl Benedikt Frey Professor of A.I. and work at the University of Oxford Gary Marcus Founder of Geometric.AI (acquired by Uber) and author of “Taming Silicon Valley” Nick Frosst Co-founder of Cohere, an A.I. start-up Ajeya Cotra A.I. risk assessor at METR, a research nonprofit Aravind Srinivas Co-founder and chief executive of Perplexity, a chatbot search engine Helen Toner Interim executive director of Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology Conversation What is your biggest bet about the future of A.I. in five years? Yuval Noah Harari Historian Within five years, A.I. agents are likely to become legal persons in at least some countries. Melanie Mitchell Computer scientist A.I. won’t have cured cancer or solved physics. Also, no one will consider the ability to converse fluently a definitive sign of intelligence. Helen Toner A.I. policy researcher I expect we’ll have A.I. systems that can clearly contribute at the cutting edge of multiple scientific fields, but that you still wouldn’t trust with planning summer camps for your kid. Nick Frosst Co-founder of Cohere A.I. will become boring in the best way. It’ll fade into the background like GPS or spreadsheets, powering everyday tools and humans at work. It’s the most banal use cases that have the most transformative impact. Carl Benedikt Frey Economist A.I. won’t deliver lasting prosperity if it’s used mainly to automate what we already do. A.I. productivity tools give us cheaper spreadsheets the way better looms gave us cheaper cloth. But the great leaps come from new industries, not faster repetition. Gary Marcus Cognitive scientist No way will artificial general intelligence arrive by the end of 2027, and most likely not even by the end of 2032, either. Ajeya Cotra A.I. risk researcher I think A.I. companies may have substantially automated their own operations with A.I. five years from now, and this could make A.I. progress go much faster. Aravind Srinivas Chief executive of Perplexity People want highly personal A.I. assistants to work for them. It’s their A.I., not the A.I. We build those, and we will fight for users’ rights to have A.I. assistants privately and securely. What will A.I.’s impact be on medicine in the near term? Cotra Marcus Small Mitchell Frey Harari Toner Moderate Frosst Srinivas Large Gary Marcus Cognitive scientist We’ve seen lots of proof of concept, but there hasn’t been much real-world application yet to my knowledge beyond medical note taking. Nick Frosst Co-founder of Cohere A.I. will absolutely increase the effectiveness of doctors by reducing their workload per patient in areas like the ability to quickly review their medical histories, effectively organize new medical information and identify potential problems earlier. But while A.I. is extremely good at analyzing huge amounts of data and finding answers and useful patterns, it is really bad at coming up with entirely new ideas. The idea that A.I. is likely to autonomously create new medicines, for example? People will probably be disappointed. What will A.I.’s impact be on programming? Cotra Mitchell Harari Marcus Toner Frey Frosst Srinivas Large Yuval Noah Harari Historian Coding is mostly about manipulating information, and involves few physical and biological constraints. It’s an ideal playground for A.I. Carl Benedikt Frey Economist In a randomized trial , developers finished a given task about 56 percent more quickly using GitHub Copilot. Over 80 percent of developers in 2025 said they’re using or plan to use A.I. tools — though just a third trusted the outputs. Review by humans still matters. What will A.I.’s impact be on scientific research? Marcus Cotra Toner Mitchell Frey Moderate Harari Frosst Srinivas Large Melanie Mitchell Computer scientist I believe this impact will not be as rapid as many think. A.I. systems still can’t do things humans are essential for, like asking the right questions, planning experiments and entire scientific programs, and understanding data in different contexts. Aravind Srinivas Chief executive of Perplexity As A.I. increasingly contains more of the world’s knowledge, it becomes an even more powerful tool for anyone with questions. Humans have always been great at having questions. A.I. will be great at having answers. What will A.I.’s impact be on transportation? Marcus Harari Cotra Toner Small Mitchell Srinivas Frosst Moderate Frey Large Nick Frosst Co-founder of Cohere I’m most excited about how A.I. will improve the behind-the-scenes logistics of transportation to make moving people and goods more efficient and safe — like predictive maintenance, smart traffic analysis, route optimization and safety features for drivers. Helen Toner A.I. policy researcher I’m very excited for self-driving cars to be rolled out more widely, given the tens of thousands of traffic deaths they could potentially avert each year in the United States. But the rollout is proceeding relatively slowly, and it’s unclear how significant A.I.’s effects on other modes of transportation will be. What will A.I.’s impact be on education? Harari Cotra Frosst Toner Moderate Mitchell Frey Marcus Srinivas Large Carl Benedikt Frey Economist A.I. tutors may already outperform most human teachers, but they also make shortcuts tempting and can hinder genuine exploration. We need to set aside A.I.-free time to read and explore independently, and encourage using A.I. tutors to question and probe one’s own understanding. Moreover, we should place greater emphasis on in-person, tutorial-style teaching in which students debate, defend their views and are pushed to articulate their reasoning. Gary Marcus Cognitive scientist Most of the impact has been negative; high schools and colleges are at a loss as to how to proceed now that term papers are no longer valid either as an evaluation or as a means to get students to think. Most other applications remain speculative. Helen Toner A.I. policy researcher Education was already due for a significant shake-up, so the need to adapt to new A.I. tools might be a blessing in disguise. What will A.I.’s impact be on mental health? Frey Marcus Small Frosst Mitchell Harari Cotra Toner Moderate Srinivas Large Melanie Mitchell Computer scientist On the bad side: A.I.-induced psychosis! On the good side, some people will get a lot out of using chatbots as therapists. Yuval Noah Harari Historian The rapid changes of the A.I. revolution are likely to cause a mental health crisis as humans struggle to adapt. We are about to conduct the biggest psychological experiment in human history, on billions of human guinea pigs, and nobody can predict what the results will be. Nick Frosst Co-founder of Cohere A.I. chatbots offer scalable support for mild symptoms but they’re no substitute for human therapists. The technology struggles with nuance, cultural context and long-term emotional depth. There are many mental health care challenges that should be handled by human professionals. What will A.I.’s impact be on art and creativity? Toner Frosst Cotra Frey Moderate Mitchell Harari Marcus Srinivas Large Melanie Mitchell Computer scientist A.I. is, and will continue to be, transformative in art, writing, music, et cetera — not because A.I. is better at creativity than humans, but because it is a lot cheaper, and often that unfortunately matters more for how much it will be used. Yuval Noah Harari Historian In more and more fields, A.I. proves to be more creative than humans. Any creative activity that boils down to finding patterns and breaking patterns is likely to be taken over by A.I. Nick Frosst Co-founder of Cohere As both a musician and someone building A.I., I see the creative potential of this technology through a unique lens. A.I. can generate feedback or thought-starters, but it’s the human who decides what feels right. What’s one misconception about A.I. that you think is worth dispelling? Melanie Mitchell Computer scientist The misconception that A.I. has “magic” or “emergent” abilities that are impossible to understand and predict. This is mainly a view of the public (and policymakers, to some extent). Technologists and Silicon Valley often push this narrative but I don’t know how much they really believe it. Yuval Noah Harari Historian A.I. isn’t a tool entirely under human control — it is an agent that can make decisions and invent ideas by itself. While I don’t think A.I. will become conscious in the near future, it is highly likely these models will be able to simulate
