---
id: 223
url: https://obsolescence.dev/pdp1-manual.html
title: PDP-1 Manual, 2025 Edition
domain: obsolescence.dev
source_date: '2025-10-05'
tags:
- tutorial
- lisp
- c
- emulator
summary: This is a 2025 online manual for the PDP-1, a groundbreaking 1959 computer,
  and its modern replica called the PiDP-1. The manual provides comprehensive guides
  for getting started with either the historical machine or the contemporary replica,
  covering setup, operation, programming in Assembly/C/Lisp, and various software
  simulations of peripherals like typewriters and displays. It emphasizes that the
  PiDP-1 project aims to preserve hands-on knowledge of early computing history and
  can run on affordable hardware like a Raspberry Pi, accessible to modern users interested
  in vintage computer technology.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# PDP-1 Manual, 2025 Edition

THE DEC PDP-1 MANUAL 2025 ONLINE EDITION CONTENTS Getting Started Introduction Using the PiDP-1 Using the Sense Switches for quick boot options File exchange between PDP-1 and modern computers Appendix: Understanding the PiDP-1 software setup Using a PDP-1 - either a 1959 or a 2025 version Introduction to the Front Panel Mounting & loading a paper tape Games & Graphics Demos Assembly programming on the PDP-1: introduction C programming on the PDP-1: introduction Lisp programming on the PDP-1: introduction Music: Samson's Harmony compiler/player PDP-1 Learning by Doing - some interesting programs PDP-1: AI programming assistant & example code Getting Started Introduction You don't need the PiDP-1 replica. The software runs and works just fine on any Linux machine, using a virtual front panel instead of the PiDP-1 hardware . And you're very welcome to join the PiDP-1 Google Group without the actual PiDP-1 hardware by the way - our goal is to revive the PDP-1, not necessarily to sell kits. Thank you for keeping computer history alive! Digital Equipment Corporation introduced their first Programmed Data Processor, the PDP-1, in 1959. Designed on the basis of MIT’s Project Whirlwind, TX-0 and TX-2 computers, the PDP-1 was designed in three and a half months through the genius of Ben Gurley. It was one of the first commercially available interactive computers – a revolution in a world familiar with batch-oriented, punch card-fed behemoths. The purpose of the PiDP-1 project is to keep hands-on knowledge of the machine alive, and to help build a new user community to the first personable computer – one that sparked off computing as we know it today. This manual starts with a section on setting up/operating the PiDP-1 replica. Then, we forget about the replica thing and focus on how to operate 'any' PDP-1. DEC’s own PDP-1 documentation is available online, including its excellent PDP-1 manual. DEC’s handbooks are better introductions than we could ever write. So this manual complements DEC’s own documentation with a focus on getting you started quickly, from a 21st century perspective. Because for everything that follows after that, DEC documentation applies without restrictions :-) About the PiDP-1 We made our replica in two versions. Partly because DEC itself had a hard time making up its mind about how the PDP-1 should look, partly because we just liked both versions. So, here is the historical father of the PiDP-1 'Console version': And here is the Lawrence Livermore, father of our PiDP-1 'Rack version': Credit where credit is due We should say that Norbert Landsteiner's PDP-1 forensics over the years has been crucial to everyone with an interest in the PDP-1. His web site is a treasure trove and should be the first thing to explore. We, too, learned a lot from there. The PiDP-1 would be no fun without all that work to lean on. The PDP-1 restoration team at the Computer History Museum gave us a lot of support and encouragement. A lot of patience, too - thank you Lyle Bickley, Bob Rosenbloom and Abilio Marques. Software for the PDP-1 has been preserved to a surprising degree. We mourn the loss of TECO, of course, but so much else has been preserved. That is not because of luck, but because of Al Kossow's bitsavers.org. 1. Building the 2025 PiDP-1 replica Please refer to the PiDP-1 Building Instructions & the extended PiDP-1 Rack Version Building Instructions. 2. Installing the PiDP-1 software Please refer to section 2 of the PiDP-1 Building Instructions. But a bit more background will be useful. The PiDP-1 is designed to either use the $15 Raspberry Pi Zero 2W, or the more expensive Pi 5. This is a matter of preference, both work equally fine if you do not want your PiDP-1 to run as a 'normal Pi;, with a media server or whatever you use a Pi for. For concurrent use, you'd normally choose the extra horse power of the Pi 5. If you use the Pi 5, we recommend you start with the GUI install. See below. You can always switch to the Web interface if you find you prefer that. If you use a Pi Zero 2W, use a Pi OS set up to boot into the Linux command line, not the GUI desktop. You'll use the Web interface of the PiDP-1 software. 3. Using the PiDP-1 Important to understand before you continue: The PiDP-1 will be running the PDP-1 'core' simulator. Then, there are separate simulators for all the major peripherals: the Soroban typewriter, for keyboard input and typewriter console output the Type 30 Display the paper tape and paper punch devices So although the PDP-1 simulator will always run on the PiDP-1, its peripherals can be accessed in three different ways . 1. Stand-alone PiDP-1: GUI interface Use this if you start on a Pi 5. It is not suitable for a Pi Zero. The screen shot shows the Peripherals program full screen. Hit F11, and you'll see that you are on the regular Pi desktop. Note that you can shift/resize the peripherals on screen, and save that as a new default. Important if you use a 7 inch HMDI monitor in the PiDP-1 Rack! to activate this mode: pdp1control set gui 2. Headless PiDP-1: Web interface Use this for easy connection to your PiDP-1 from your laptop. It is very similar to the GUI interface, but now using your laptop over wifi instead of the Pi's monitor/keyboard. If your PiDP-1 has the name pdp1, then point the browser to http://pdp1.local:8080 to activate this mode: pdp1control set web 3. Custom setups: Peripheral Apps Use this if, for instance, you want the Type 30 display to run full-screen on the Pi's monitor, and the Typewriter terminal plus paper tape visualiser on your laptop. Or the other way around. Mix and match for the ideal demo setup. These 'peripheral apps' can run on the Pi. Or Linux, and Windows WSL2, connecting to the PDP-1 over wifi. to activate this mode: pdp1control set apps (will run apps on the Pi, you can compile them to run as remotes on your laptop) The choice of user interface is largely a matter of preference. But if you use a Pi Zero 2W, which is not terribly powerful, you should not boot it into the desktop GUI. Boot it into the Linux command line instead. You can use the PiDP-1 headless and then, the Pi Zero 2W is a very nice brain for the PiDP-1! OR run the Peripheral Apps on your laptop. Setting up your PiDP-1 starts with the install script, /opt/pidp1/install/install.sh . You need to run it at setup, but you can rerun it at any time to change things or update the software. In daily use, you will use two other commands. They have desktop icon equivalents, but we'll describe the command-line commands here: pdp1control commands pdp1control is used to control the (simulated) PDP-1. pdp1control start : start the PDP-1 pdp1control start x can be used if you are without the PiDP-1 hardware. x is the boot number you want to run. pdp1control stop , status or stat do what you'd expect. There are three configuration options: pdp1control set gui , set web or set apps - switch between the gui setup (HMDI/keyboard on the Pi),the web server (http://pidp1.local:8080/) or the separate apps that can run on the Pi or elsewhere. pdp1control panel pidp or virtual - switch between the PiDP-1 hardware front panel or a virtual on-screen front panel. pdp1control usbtape y or n en/disable the feature of using USB sticks as paper tapes. pdp1 commands pdp1 is a simple way to access/use the PDP-1 peripherals. Only necessary with the Apps interface, really. pdp1 soroban opens the Soroban used as the terminal pdp1 ptp saves tape coming out of the paper tape punch pdp1 ptr loads an existing tape into the paper tape reader pdp1 type30 opens the Type 30 display. Resize, or F11 toggles full-screen. Close any other display simulator first. pdp1 type30b opens a second Type 30 display - for dual-screen spacewar pdp1 sim drops you into the PDP-1 simulator program, which you'll not normally need to do Using USB sticks as paper tapes If you enable the use of USB ports as paper tapes : One USB connector is used as the reader, a second one as the punch. To mount a paper tape image in the reader: insert the USB stick. The most recent paper tape image with extension .pt is automatically mounted. Pull out to replace with a new tape. To save output from the paper tape punch, just insert a USB stick in the USB connector defined as the punch. This 'tears off the punched tape' and saves it on the USB stick with a time stamp as its filename. The punch is cleared. The USB ports defined as punch and reader are set up in /opt/pidp1/bin/usb_paper_tape_ports. The default configuration is for a Raspberry Pi, the bottom black USB connector is punch; the top one is reader. If the USB ports are not assigned to your liking, do pdp1control stop and /opt/pidp1/bin/pdp1_usb_monitor -scan . It will let you reassign the USB ports that are used. If this mode is enabled, you can still mount paper tapes from the SD card, that does not interfere. Customising the GUI Peripheral layout The GUI peripheral display is a distraction-free, minimalist view of the PDP-1 peripherals. Although you can use it as just a window on the Pi's desktop, it makes more sense to run it full screen. Toggle full-screen mode with F11 . PiDP-1 Rack users can add a 7 inch HDMI display behind the middle two speaker slots. And that is why the layout of the GUI peripheral display can be adjusted and saved, so that the Type 30, Typewriter and/or Paper Tape displays fit exactly behind the two speaker slots: Press F2 to toggle in/out of layout mode. Here you can rearrange the size/position of elements (paper tapes, typewriter, Type 30). left mouse button moves, right button resizes. Cycling with tab and using arrow keys also works; Use ctrl to resize and shift for more precise movement. Use Spacebar to toggle visibility of elements Create a new layout with F3 and cycle through layouts with F1 Save the current configuration with F6 and re-read it with F5 The background can be set by editing the configuration, `pdp1_layout.txt` in the current directory. Experiment with custom
