---
id: 818
url: https://lucumr.pocoo.org/2024/11/18/threads-beat-async-await/
title: 'Playground Wisdom: Threads Beat Async/Await | Armin Ronacher''s Thoughts and
  Writings'
domain: lucumr.pocoo.org
source_date: '2026-02-12'
tags:
- tutorial
- distributed-systems
summary: Armin Ronacher argues that threads are a superior concurrency model compared
  to async/await for most languages, contending that async/await creates problematic
  "colored functions" that are only compatible in one direction and complicate code
  without providing real benefits over simpler threading models. He illustrates how
  children learning programming through Scratch naturally understand concurrent actor-based
  systems without needing to comprehend complex abstractions like monads or async/await,
  suggesting that imperative languages with threading are not inferior to functional
  approaches. The key takeaway is that we should reconsider our preference for async/await
  abstractions and instead embrace simpler threading models that allow more natural
  expression of concurrent programs.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Playground Wisdom: Threads Beat Async/Await | Armin Ronacher's Thoughts and Writings

Armin Ronacher 's Thoughts and Writings blog archive projects travel talks about Playground Wisdom: Threads Beat Async/Await written on November 18, 2024 It’s been a few years since I wrote about my challenges with async / await -based systems and how they just seem to not support back pressure well . A few years later, I do not think that this problem has subsided much, but my thinking and understanding have perhaps evolved a bit. I’m now convinced that async / await is, in fact, a bad abstraction for most languages, and we should be aiming for something better instead and that I believe to be thread. In this post, I’m also going to rehash many arguments from very clever people that came before me. Nothing here is new, I just hope to bring it to a new group of readers. In particular, you should really consider these who highly influential pieces: Bob Nystrom’s What Color is Your Function post, which makes a very strong case that having two types of functions, which are only compatible in one direction, causes problems. Ron Pressler’s Please stop polluting our imperative languages with pure concepts which I think is probably the single most important talk on that topic. Nathaniel J. Smith’s Notes on structured concurrency, or: Go statement considered harmful which does a really good job laying out the motivation for structured concurrency. Your Child Loves Actor Frameworks As programmers, we are so used to how things work that we make some implicit assumptions that really cloud our ability to think freely. Let me present you with a piece of code that demonstrates this: def move_mouse (): while mouse . x < 200 : mouse . x += 5 sleep ( 10 ) def move_cat (): while cat . x < 200 : cat . x += 10 sleep ( 10 ) move_mouse () move_cat () Read that code and then answer this question: do the mouse and cat move at the same time, or one after another? I guarantee you that 10 out of 10 programmers will correctly state that they move one after another. It makes sense because we know Python and the concept of threads, scheduling and whatnot. But if you speak to a group of children familiar with Scratch , they are likely to conclude that mouse and cat move simultaneously. The reason is that if you are exposed to programming via Scratch you are exposed to a primitive form of actor programming. The cat and the mouse are both actors. In fact, the UI makes this pretty damn clear, just that the actors are called “sprites”. You attach logic to a sprite on the screen and all these pieces of logic run at the same time . Mind-blowing. You can even send messages from sprite to sprite. The reason I want you to think about this for a moment is that I think this is rather profound. Scratch is a very, very simple system and it’s intended to teaching programming to young kids. Yet the model it promotes is an actor system! If you were to foray into programming via a traditional book on Python, C# or some other language, it’s quite likely that you will only learn about threads at the very end. Not just that, it will likely make it sound really complex and scary. Worse, you will probably only learn about actor patterns in some advanced book that will bombard you with all the complexities of large scale applications. There is something else though you should keep in mind: Scratch will not talk about threads, it will not talk about monads, it will not talk about async / await , it will not talk about schedulers. As far as you are concerned as a programmer, it’s an imperative (though colorful and visual) language with some basic “syntax” support for message passing. Concurrency comes natural. A child can program it. It’s not something to be afraid of. Imperative Programming Is Not Inferior The second thing I want you to take away is that imperative languages are not inferior to functional ones. While probably most of us are using imperative programming languages to solve problems, I think we all have been exposed to the notion that it’s inferior and not particularly pure. There is this world of functional programming, with monads and other things. This world have these nice things involving composition, logic and maths and fancy looking theorems. If you program in that, you’re almost transcending to a higher plane and looking down to the folks who are stitching together if statements, for loops, make side effects everywhere, and are doing highly inappropriate things with IO. Okay, maybe it’s not quite as bad, but I don’t think I’m completely wrong with those vibes. And look, I get it. I feel happy chaining together lambdas in Rust and JavaScript. But we should also be aware that these constructs are, in many languages, bolted on. Go, for instance, gets away without most of this, and that does not make it an inferior language! So what you should keep in mind here is that there are different paradigms, and mentally you should try to stop thinking for a moment that functional programming has all its stuff figured out, and imperative programming does not. Instead, I want to talk about how functional languages and imperative languages are dealing with “waiting”. The first thing I want to back to is the example from above. Both of the functions (for the cat and the mouse) can be seen as separate threads of execution. When the code calls sleep(10) there’s clearly an expectation by the programmer that the computer will temporarily pause the execution and continue later. I don’t want to bore you with monads, so as my “functional” programming language, I will use JavaScript and promises. I think that’s an abstraction that most readers will be sufficiently familiar with: function moveMouseBlocking () { while ( mouse . x < 200 ) { mouse . x += 5 ; sleep ( 10 ); // a blocking sleep } } function moveMouseAsync () { return new Promise (( resolve ) => { function iterate () { if ( mouse . x < 200 ) { mouse . x += 5 ; sleep ( 10 ). then ( iterate ); // non blocking sleep } else { resolve (); } } iterate (); }); } You can immediately see a challenge here: it’s very hard to translate the blocking example into a non blocking example because all the sudden we need to find a way to express our loop (or really any control flow). We need to manually decompose it into a form of recursive function calling and we need the help of a scheduler and executor here to do the waiting. This style obviously eventually became annoying enough to deal with that async / await was introduced to mostly restore the sanity of the old code. So it now can look more like this: async function moveMouseAsync () { while ( mouse . x < 200 ) { mouse . x += 5 ; await sleep ( 10 ); } } Behind the scenes though, nothing has really changed, and in particular, when you call that function, you just get an object that encompasses the “composition of the computation”. That object is a promise which will eventually hold the resulting value. In fact, in some languages like C#, the compiler will really just transpile this into chained function calls. With the promise in hand, you can await the result, or register a callback with then which gets invoked if this thing ever runs to completion. For a programmer, I think async / await is clearly understood as some sort of neat abstraction — an abstraction over promises and callbacks. However strictly speaking, it’s just worse than where we started out, because in terms of expressiveness, we have lost an important affordance: we cannot freely suspend. In the original blocking code, when we invoked sleep we suspended for 10 milliseconds implicitly; we cannot do the same with the async call. Here we have to “ await ” the sleep operation. This is the crucial aspect of why we’re having these “colored functions”. Only an async function can call another async function, as you cannot await in a sync function. Halting Problems The above example shows another problem that async / await causes: what if we never resolve? A normal function call eventually returns, the stack unwinds, and we’re ready to receive the result. In an async world, someone has to call resolve at the very end. What if that is never called? Now in theory, that does not seem all that different from someone calling sleep() with a large number to suspend for a very long time, or waiting on a pipe that never gets data sent into. But it is different! In one case, we keep the call stack and everything that relates to it alive; in another case, we just have a promise and are waiting for independent garbage collection with everything already unwound. Contract wise, there is absolutely nothing that says one has to call resolve . As we know from theory the halting problem is undecidable so it’s going to be actually impossible to know if someone will call resolve or not. That sounds pedantic, but it’s very important because promises/futures and async / await are making something strictly worse than not having them. Let’s consider a JavaScript promise to be the most canonical example of what this looks like. A promise is created by an anonymous function, that is invoked to eventually call resolve . Take this example: let neverSettle = new Promise (( resolve ) => { // this function ends, but we never called resolve }); Let me clarify first that this is not a JavaScript specific problem, but it’s nice to show it this way. This is a completely legal thing! It’s a promise, that never resolves. That is not a bug! The anonymous function in the promise itself will return, the stack will unwind, and we are left with a “pending” promise that will eventually get garbage collected. That is a bit of a problem because since it will never resolve, you can also never await it. Think of the following example, which demonstrates this problem a bit. In practice you might want to reduce how many things can work at once, so let’s imagine a system that can handle up to 10 things that run concurrently. So we might want to use a semaphore to give out 10 tokens so up to 10 things can run at once; otherwise, it applies back pressure. So the
