---
id: 947
url: https://indieweb.org/POSSE
title: POSSE - IndieWeb
domain: indieweb.org
source_date: '2026-03-23'
tags:
- web-dev
- social-media
summary: POSSE (Publish On your own Site, Syndicate Elsewhere) is an IndieWeb practice
  where users post content on their own website first, then share copies or links
  to social media platforms while maintaining a link back to the original. This approach
  prioritizes content ownership, reduces dependency on third-party services, and ensures
  canonical URLs remain on the user's domain while allowing friends to engage through
  their preferred platforms. POSSE offers practical benefits like better search visibility,
  protection against content theft, and the ability to use social platforms' features
  while maintaining full control over original content.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# POSSE - IndieWeb

From IndieWeb POSSE icon POSSE is an abbreviation for Publish (on your) Own Site, Syndicate Elsewhere , the practice of posting content on your own site first, then publishing copies or sharing links to third parties (like social media silos) with original post links to provide viewers a path to directly interacting with your content. ▶️ watch Zach’s 1min * video intro to POSSE Why Let your friends read your posts, their way. POSSE lets your friends keep using whatever they use to read your stuff (e.g. social media silos like Instagram , Tumblr , Twitter , Neocities , etc.). Stay in touch with friends now , not some theoretical future. POSSE is about staying in touch with current friends now, rather than the potential of staying in touch with friends in the future. Friends are more important than federation. By focusing on relationships that matter to people rather than architectural ideals, from a human perspective, POSSE is more important than federation . Additionally, if federated approaches take a POSSE approach first, they will likely get better adoption (everyone wants to stay in touch with their friends), and thereby more rapidly approach that federated future. POSSE is beyond blogging. It's a key part of why and how the IndieWeb movement is different from just "everyone blog on their own site", and also different from "everyone just install and run (YourFavoriteSocialSoftware)" etc. monoculture solutions. Why In General POSSE is considered a robust and preferable syndication model for the following reasons: Reduce 3rd party dependence. By posting directly to your own site, you're not dependent on 3rd Party services to do so -- if you can access your site, you can publish your content. On the contrary with PESOS, when the 3rd party site is down , you are unable to add content. Ownership. By posting first on your own site, you create a direct ownership chain that can be traced back to you without any intervening 3rd party services (silos) TOS's getting in the way (which is a vulnerability of PESOS ). Own canonical URLs to your content. Canonical URLs to your content are on your domain. Copies can cite the original. By posting content first to your own site (and thus creating a permalink for it), copies that you post on 3rd Party services can link or cite the original on your site (see syndication_formats and POSSE Notes to Twitter ) Better search. Searching public content on your own domain (with any web search engine of your choice) works better than depending on silos exclusively to search your posts (e.g. Twitter for a while only showed recent tweets in search results. Facebook still has very poor search results). backfeed can be used to pull in (reverse syndicate) responses from other services allows taking advantage of other services' social layers and aggregation features while storing the canonical copy of your content on your own site ... Why Link To Your Original Common POSSE practice is to link from POSSE copies to your original, using a permashortlink . Here are a few reasons why: Discovery of your original content. discovery of your original content from the copies on 3rd party services is enabled by the permashortlinks to your originals posted on said services Subvert spammers who copy your posts. When spammers (e.g. @sin3rss) mindlessly copy from your POSSE copies and repost, they also copy the link back to the original, and thus provide more distribution for people to find and view your original post. " 2011-01-09 internet aikido " of a sort. Better ranking for your original posts. If/when your POSSE copies are themselves copied by others and (re)posted elsewhere (e.g. manual retweets, RSS bots etc.), when the copies link to your original posts, search engines figure that out by following those links back to the original and ranking it higher. How to How to implement This section is for web developers implementing POSSE. In General In general, when your content posting software posts something, it should also post a copy to the silo destinations of your choice, with an original post link (e.g. permashortlink or permashortcitation ) back to your original. The details of how to do so vary per destination. See the silo-specific sections below. Once you have posted the copy to the silo, you should: link to the syndicated copy from the original in a posts-elsewhere section on your post. User Interface The best user interface (UI) is automatic, dependable, and invisible. If you can implement POSSEing in a way that always does exactly what you want, predictably, then no explicit UI is needed. Preview One way to provide more predictability and inspire confidence is to show what will be POSSEd (within the limitations of the destination) as a preview before publishing (needs screenshot) Twitter Main article: Twitter#POSSE_to_Twitter Twitter is perhaps the most popular POSSE destination and a good place to start. If you can start posting notes (tweets) to your own site and POSSEing to Twitter, instead of posting directly to Twitter, you have taken a big step towards owning your data. Details: API Access - posting new tweets works nicely due to permanent API tokens, and the return value contains a URL to the posted As of 2022-11, Twitter is rejecting new API access for applications used to POSSE/backfeed on the grounds that they may violate twitter’s rules and/or policies — Barnaby Walters Supports very complete web action endpoints, so semi-manual posting is easy to implement What are these endpoints? Is this still the case in 2022? — Barnaby Walters See POSSE to Twitter for details on how to POSSE both notes and articles (blog posts) to Twitter. Facebook Main article: POSSE to Facebook There are two options for POSSEing to Facebook currently: Manually crosspost Semi-automatically with the Bridgy browser extension for Facebook Medium Main article: Medium You can create posts via the posts API Medium also supports manual POSSE via the Import Post function , which preserves rel-canonical links to the original URL Shane Becker and Ben Werdmüller manually POSSE to Medium Chris Aldrich uses the WordPress Medium Plugin to POSSE to Medium. They also support bulk migration (aka mass POSSE) for porting across lots of posts after which posts can be POSSEd by means of their plugin. Aaron Gustafson Wrote a Jekyll plugin to POSSE to Medium. WordPress Main article: WordPress How does veganstraightedge.com do it? (all his articles are manually POSSEd to WordPress.com) Chris Aldrich uses a WordPress plugin WordPress Crosspost to POSSE from a self-hosted WordPress install to WordPress.com. Ghost Main article: Ghost a community developed open source tool is available on GitHub ; the tool uses Ghost webhooks to receive latest published post in JSON format and syndicates the posts to Mastodon and Bluesky accounts behindtheviewfinder.com blog uses the above tool to syndicate it's posts Plain Text Notes Some destinations (e.g. SMS or push notifications ) may require a pure plain text representation. h-entry_to_text is a method of generating a plain text representation from an arbitrary h-entry Software Software and libraries to implement POSSE: PHP The POSSE namespace in php-helpers (might be moved to a separate package) contains various truncation, preparation and syndication functions including HTML => plaintext µblog syntax converter Python SiloRider is a command-line tool, implemented in Python, that lets you implement POSSE to various services (Twitter and Mastodon as of 2018-08-01). Feed2Toot is another command-line python tool that parses any number of RSS feeds and posts their content on ActivityPub based services (tested with: Mastodon, Pleroma). Contains some neat bells and whistles like advanced post filtering, numerous options for feed parsing and toot formatting. Docker POSSE Party : self-hosted software for POSSE Services Bridgy Publish is POSSE-as-a-service. It supports Twitter , Flickr , GitHub and Mastodon . You can use it interactively or programmatically via webmention . Mugged Tweets - will POSSE a note to a mug (may require first POSSEing to Twitter) IFTTT allows automatically reposting content with an RSS or Atom feed to a number of silos incuding Twitter, Tumblr, and Facebook EchoFeed Publishing Flows There's at least two ways to implement a POSSE content posting flow: Client to site to silo The user writes a piece of content using a publishing client Optional: client provides UI for selecting which 3rd party services to push to if it knows about them, with optional customizations for per service Having finished the content, the user publishes content to their server (optionally: with metadata of which 3rd party services and any customizations thereof) Optional: client can generate a permalink knowing the state of the server, and publish to that permalink The server publishes the content, generates a permalink and summary (and/or customized content suited to 3rd party services) if necessary The server posts copies with permalinks to 3rd party services Advantages: User only has to interact with one site over the internet, their own Syndication can be done fully automatically by the server Disadvantages: any? Client to site and silo The user writes a piece of content using a publishing client Having finished the content, the user publishes it to their server The client queries the server for the URL of the content it just pushed The publishing client presents the user with an interface for selecting: Which 3rd party services to publish to The exact content published to the services, pre-filled with a summary based on the produced content The user selects the services and submits the form The publishing client posts the content summaries out to the 3rd party services Advantages: More user control over timing and editing of copies of content to 3rd party services Disadvantages: Syndication requires a manual step each time Dependent on client connectivity directly to 3rd party services (problematic in
