---
id: 1023
url: https://chapel-lang.org/blog/posts/30years/
title: 'Reflections on 30 Years of HPC Programming: So many hardware advances, so
  little adoption of new languages'
domain: chapel-lang.org
source_date: '2026-04-17'
tags:
- compilers
- c
- cpp
- academic-paper
summary: 'Over the past 30 years, HPC hardware has experienced extraordinary improvements,
  with core counts increasing by hundreds of thousands and performance gains reaching
  millions of times, driven by advances in multicore processors, GPUs, and high-speed
  networks. However, the programming languages and models used in HPC have remained
  remarkably stagnant, with Fortran, C, and C++ still dominating alongside MPI and
  OpenMP, while few new programming languages have achieved significant adoption despite
  numerous attempts to modernize HPC development. This disconnect highlights a critical
  challenge in the field: despite revolutionary hardware capabilities, the HPC community
  has largely failed to adopt innovative programming approaches that could improve
  productivity and ease of use.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Reflections on 30 Years of HPC Programming: So many hardware advances, so little adoption of new languages

Reflections on 30 Years of HPC Programming: So many hardware advances, so little adoption of new languages Posted on April 9, 2026. Tags: Editorial History Hardware GPUs Portability Performance Safety HPSF By: Brad Chamberlain Table of Contents Last summer, I had the opportunity to give the keynote at HIPS 2025 —the 30th International Workshop on High-Level Parallel Programming Models and Supportive Environments. This was quite an honor since, over its history, HIPS has been a key workshop for projects like Chapel that strive to create productive approaches to scalable parallel programming [note: For readers unfamiliar with HIPS, its publications focus on high-level programming of multiprocessors, compute clusters, and massively parallel machines via language design, compilers, runtime systems, and programming tools. A long-term refrain from its call for papers has been “We especially invite papers demonstrating innovative approaches in the area of emerging programming models for large-scale parallel systems and many-core architectures.” ] . To commemorate the 30th instance of HIPS, I took the approach of using my talk to reflect on the past 30 years of programming within the field of HPC, or High-Performance Computing. This was a sobering exercise, but one that was well-received. In November, I reprised the talk in a condensed lightning talk format for CLSAC 2025 . In this blog article, I’ll attempt to capture some of the main elements of those talks for a wider audience. 30 Years of Top HPC Systems Like so many “ n years of HPC” retrospectives, let’s start by looking to the TOP500 list [note: The TOP500 is a ranking of HPC systems, as measured by their performance on the Linpack benchmark. All TOP500 results and images in this article originate from top500.org and are used with permission. Note that I’ve updated the original talk contents to reflect the latest results from November 2025. ] to see how HPC systems themselves have changed over the past three decades. For simplicity, I’ll just focus on the top five systems from each list. Top HPC Systems in 1995 Browsing the results from 30 years ago—November 1995—we see that systems from Fujitsu, Intel, and Cray make up the top five, where their network interconnects used crossbar, 2D mesh, and 3D torus topologies, respectively. Core counts ranged from 80 to 3,680, and performance as measured by Rmax values ranged from 98.9 to 170 GFlop/s. The following screenshot from the TOP500 website summarizes these systems and results: Top HPC Systems Today Jumping forward to the latest TOP500 list, published in November 2025, we see systems from HPE Cray, Eviden/Bull, and Microsoft. These are running using Slingshot-11 and InfiniBand NDR interconnects that utilize topologies based on dragonfly[+] and/or fat-trees. Core counts have jumped to the millions (2,073,600–11,340,000 cores), and Rmax values range from 561 to 1809 PFlop/s: HPC Systems: Then vs. Now Summarizing the changes over these 30 years, core counts have increased by a factor of 100s to 100s of thousands, while performance has improved by factors of millions to 10s of millions—a massive improvement! 1995 top 5 2025 top 5 Delta Cores 80–3680 2,073,600–11,340,000 ~563–141,750 × \times × Rmax 98.9–170 GFlop/s 561.2–1809 PFlop/s ~3,300,000–18,300,000 × \times × Vendors Fujitsu, Intel, Cray HPE, Eviden, Microsoft — Networks crossbar, mesh, torus dragonfly[+], fat-trees higher-radix, lower-diameter Million-fold improvements like these don’t happen without significant effort, even with the passage of decades of time; so it’s worth reflecting on what changes in hardware and HPC system architecture took place over this period to generate the massive gains seen here. Though I’m not a hardware architect, from my perspective, I tend to think of the main factors as having been: the commodification of processors with vector instructions the commodification of multicore/manycore CPUs and chiplet -based designs the advent of multi-socket compute node architectures the ability to create high-radix, low-diameter networks due to hardware trends the commodification of GPUs and successful applications of GPU computing in HPC Beyond the performance improvements that can be attributed to these changes, it’s interesting to consider their impacts on programmers. Specifically, which changes have made HPC programming easier, and which have made it harder? Think about your answers, and I’ll return to this question in a bit. 30 Years of HPC Programming Next, let’s consider the dominant HPC programming notations over this same time period. Unfortunately, there isn’t an obvious analogue to the TOP500 for HPC programming, so for this article, I’ll give you my take on things based on my experiences, research, and memory. HPC Programming circa 1995 From my perspective in November 1995, the dominant and most broadly adopted HPC programming languages were Fortran, C, and C++. For scripting, the dominant technologies seemed to be Perl, sh/csh/tcsh, or Tcl/TK. MPI, PVM, and SHMEM were the dominant [note: It’s fair to wonder to what degree hindsight affects my characterizations here. Were MPI or SHMEM truly “dominant” in 1995? Or is it only because we can validate their longevity today that I consider them to be? ] ways of programming distributed-memory systems at the time. High Performance Fortran (HPF) was getting a lot of attention and funding, but my perception is that it was not really getting a lot of use in practical applications developed outside of the teams who were researching and developing it. For shared-memory parallelism, I was surprised to be reminded that OpenMP was still a few years in the future at this time, forming its Architecture Review Board and publishing its 1.0 specification in 1997. In 1995, you likely would have turned to POSIX threads or vendor-specific compiler pragmas and markups (such as Cray Microtasking) if you wanted loop- or thread-level parallelism. Then again, since processors were typically single-core at that time, you also might not bother unless they supported vector instructions. HPC Programming Today If we think about what is broadly adopted in HPC today, the list is disappointingly similar to 1995. As far as programming languages go, Fortran, C, and C++ still dominate the landscape in HPC. Though PVM has fallen off and HPF failed to catch on, MPI and SHMEM are still alive and well, dominating distributed-memory HPC programming. After its 1997 launch, OpenMP quickly became dominant for shared-memory programming and remains so today, making it a mainstay for most of the past 30 years. Kokkos, a C++ library-based notation is one of the few programming models to make significant inroads towards HPC adoption over the past decade or so, serving as an alternative to OpenMP for shared-memory parallelism. The biggest change in HPC programming notations since 1995 has been caused by the advent of GPUs on HPC systems, and the resulting need to program them. Unfortunately, none of the 1995-era technologies were sufficient to target GPUs, leading to a plethora of new technologies being created to fill the gap. These arrived in the form of language extensions and libraries, such as CUDA, HIP, SYCL, OpenACC, OpenCL, and Kokkos. Other technologies like OpenMP evolved significantly in order to support GPUs, becoming a bit more imperative by nature in the process. In the realm of scripting, Python largely displaced Perl and Tcl/TK, while bash has generally replaced sh, csh, and tcsh as the dominant shell scripting language. “ While HPC hardware has become far more capable over the past 30 years, the HPC notations used in practice have largely stayed the same. Notably, we have failed to broadly adopt any new compiled programming languages. ” HPC Programming: Then vs. Now Summarizing, I’d consider the broadly adopted HPC programming notations of 30 years ago vs. today to be as follows: Category 1995 Notations 2025 Notations Languages Fortran, C, C++ Fortran, C, C++ Inter-node MPI, PVM, SHMEM MPI, SHMEM Intra-node Pthreads, vendor extensions (with OpenMP on the horizon) Pthreads, OpenMP, Kokkos GPUs N/A CUDA, HIP, SYCL, OpenMP, OpenACC, OpenCL, Kokkos Scripting Perl, sh/csh/tcsh, Tcl/TK Python, bash So, while HPC hardware has become far more capable over the past 30 years, resulting in amazing strides in terms of system performance, efficiency, and scalability, the HPC notations used in practice have largely stayed the same [note: Champions of Fortran, C++, MPI, or other entries on this list could argue that while the names may be the same, the technologies themselves have evolved and improved significantly over the past 30 years. For example, Fortran 2008 evolved to support distributed programming, and C++ added features for shared-memory parallelism. While such advances are important and notable, I’d say that the overall paradigm presented to users by these models remains very similar, relying on SPMD programming models, explicit communication, and relatively low-level base languages compared to more modern alternatives. ] , modulo the introduction of GPU computing. Perhaps most notably, as a community, we have failed to broadly adopt any new compiled programming languages for HPC. Standing Still? Or Losing Ground? In addition to not taking a great leap forward in the past 30 years, HPC programming has arguably lost ground due to the increased complexity of the hardware. Of the hardware changes listed above , most of them have made programming more difficult. Vector instructions, multicore processors, and GPUs have introduced new styles of parallelism for programmers to express in order to use their processors effectively. Meanwhile, the growth in cores per CPU, chiplet-based designs, and GPUs have introduced Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA) characteristics, which require greater sensitivity to data placement and affinity on the programmer’s part. “ The fact that most of our hardware advances have required us to supplem
