---
id: 1176
url: https://web.mit.edu/nelsonr/www/Repenning=Sterman_CMR_su01_.pdf
title: Repenning/Sterman CMR su01 r2
domain: web.mit.edu
source_date: '2026-06-11'
tags:
- academic-paper
- distributed-systems
summary: Despite U.S. companies spending over $100 billion annually on process improvement
  initiatives like Total Quality Management and Six Sigma, most organizations struggle
  to sustain these programs effectively, with fewer than 10% of Fortune 1000 companies
  maintaining well-developed improvement efforts. The authors argue that implementation
  failures stem not from flawed improvement tools themselves, but from systemic issues
  created by the complex interactions between tools, equipment, workers, and organizational
  structures. Their research, based on extensive case studies across multiple industries,
  reveals that the core challenge is developing internal organizational capabilities
  rather than simply adopting new techniques, and that successful sustained improvement
  requires understanding the dynamics of implementation and organizational change.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Repenning/Sterman CMR su01 r2

CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 64 Work reported here was supported by the MIT Center for Innovation in Product Development under NSF Cooperative Agreement Number EEC-9529140. For more information on the research program that generated this article, visit <http://web.mit.edu/nelsonr/www/>. Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened: CREATING AND SUSTAINING PROCESS IMPROVEMENT Nelson P. Repenning John D. Sterman H ow much would your organization pay to develop manufacturing capability equal to Toyota’s? How much would a world-class, six- sigma quality program be worth to your company? How about Harley-Davidson’s ability to tap into the hearts and minds of its cus- tomers or Dell’s ability to manage its supply chain? Most ﬁrms are working aggressively to develop these and similar capabilities through process improve- ment. The combined expenditure of U.S. companies on management consul- tants and training in 1997 was over $100 billion, and a sizeable fraction went towards efforts to develop operational capabilities matching those of the best ﬁrms in business. Whether it’s an advanced manufacturing system or the ability to respond quickly to changing customer needs, the drive toward improvement has become a way of life in corporations today. There is only one problem. Despite these vast expenditures, and notwithstanding dramatic successes in a few companies, few efforts to implement such programs actually produce signiﬁ- cant results. Consider, for example, Total Quality Management (TQM). In the 1980s, spurred by the success of many Japanese ﬁrms, TQM was all the rage among U.S. ﬁrms. Consultants and business school faculty preached its virtues and managers made pilgrimages to companies with award-winning quality pro- grams. By the mid-1990s, however, TQM was considered passé. Academics had moved on to other issues, TQM received rare mention in the popular business press, and articles that did mention it usually did so in a negative context. TQM had all the earmarks of a management fad: An initial burst of enthusiasm, a ﬂurry of activity, and then a steady decline as it was replaced by newer innova- tions such as re-engineering. It would be easy to conclude that TQM’s underly- ing value was minimal. However, when one looks at the experience a little more carefully, a dif- ferent picture emerges. A number of careful studies have now demonstrated that companies making a serious commitment to the disciplines and methods associ- ated with TQM outperform their competitors.1 There is now little doubt that when used properly, TQM produces signiﬁcant value to both organizations and their customers. Yet paradoxically, it remains little used. A recent study found that fewer than 10% of the Fortune 1000 had well-developed TQM programs; and, in another study, TQM fell from the third most commonly used business tool in 1993 to 14th in 1999.2 The situation is similar for a wide range of other administrative and technological innovations.3 Techniques touted as today’s “core competencies” all too often become tomorrow’s failed programs. Once an effort has failed, there is an almost irresistible temptation to label it a fad or “ﬂavor of the month.” However, digging a little deeper shows that many such techniques have useful content. It should come as little surprise then that many currently popular innovations are little more than old ideas with new acronyms. The core disciplines associated with statistical process control and variance reduction become six-sigma; what was once called a quality circle is now a high-performance work team. Thus, today’s managers face a paradox. On the one hand, the number of tools and techniques available to improve performance is growing rapidly. Fur- ther, with advances in information technology and the ever-growing legions of management consultants, it is easier than ever to learn about these techniques and to learn who else is using them. On the other hand, there has been little improvement in the ability of organizations to incorporate these innovations in their everyday activities. The ability to identify and learn about new improvement methods no longer presents a signiﬁcant barrier to most managers. Instead, suc- cessfully implementing these innovations presents the biggest challenge. Put more simply, you can’t buy a turnkey six-sigma quality program. It must be developed from within. To learn how ﬁrms can overcome this “improvement paradox,” we have, over the past decade, studied process improvement and learning programs, focusing on the dynamics of implementation and organizational change. We conducted over a dozen in-depth case studies in industries including telecom- munications, semiconductors, chemicals, oil, automobiles, and recreational products.4 We gathered data through observations, extensive interviews with participants, archival records, and quantitative metrics. We complemented our ﬁeld research with the development of a series of models capturing the dynamics of implementation and improvement.5 Using system dynamics as the basis for understanding implementation has yielded a number of insights into the improvement paradox. In at least some cases, these insights have proven Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 65 instrumental in helping ﬁrms beneﬁt from the potential provided by available improvement tools and techniques. Most importantly, our research suggests that the inability of most organi- zations to reap the full beneﬁt of these innovations has little to do with the spe- ciﬁc improvement tool they select. Instead, the problem has its roots in how the introduction of a new improvement program interacts with the physical, economic, social, and psychological structures in which implementation takes place. In other words, it’s not just a tool problem, any more than it’s a human resources problem or a leadership problem. Instead it is a systemic problem, one that is created by the interaction of tools, equipment, workers, and managers. The Structure of Improvement We present the lessons that have emerged from our study in the form of a causal loop diagram. Our model provides both a useful framework for thinking about the challenges associated with implementing improvement programs and practical suggestions to increase the chances that your next such effort will suc- ceed. While the theory reported here initially emerged from the study of two improvement initiatives in a major automaker,6 the resulting model is quite gen- eral and can be applied to a range of situations. We have observed these dynam- ics in almost every organization we have studied. Figure 1 begins with the basic “physics” underlying process improvement. The actual performance of any process depends on two factors: the amount of Time Spent Working and the Capability of the process used to do that work. For example, in manufacturing, net usable output is given by the product of labor hours per day and productivity (usable units per labor hour). The performance of any process can be increased by dedicating additional effort to either work or improvement. However, the two activities do not pro- duce equivalent results. Time spent on improving the capability of a process typically yields the more enduring change. For example, boosting the workweek 20% might increase output 20%, but only for the duration of the overtime. Gains in process capability, however, boost the output generated by every sub- sequent hour of effort. Similarly, overtime devoted to reworking defective prod- ucts can boost net usable output, but only as long as the overtime is continued, while eliminating the root causes of those defects permanently reduces the need for rework. We capture this persistence by representing Capability as a stock (denoted by a rectangle), that is, as an asset that accumulates improvements over time. Speciﬁcally, Time Spent on Improvement increases the ﬂow of Investments in Capability that augments process capability. While it often yields the more permanent gain, time spent on improve- ment does not immediately improve performance. It takes time to uncover the root causes of process problems and then to discover, test, and implement solu- tions, shown in the diagram as a delay between improvement activities and the Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 66 resulting change in process capability. Moreover, no improvement in capability lasts forever. Machines wear, processes go out of control without regular atten- tion, designs become obsolete, and procedures become outdated. Thus, we also show an outﬂow from the stock capturing the inevitable decline of any capabil- ity that is not regularly maintained. The lag in enhancing capability depends on the technical and organizational complexity of the process. Studies show that the delay in improving relatively simple processes such as the yield of machines in a job shop is on the order of a few months, while the delay in improving highly complex processes such as product development can be several years or more.7 Similarly, the lifetime of improvements in capability will be shorter in organizations with high rates of change in products and people. Besides the physical and institutional structures that determine perfor- mance, Figure 1 also shows the goal for process throughput set by senior man- agers (labeled Desired Performance). The goal could be the number of products demanded by customers each day, the rate at which claims need to be processed by an insurance company, or the number of new products the ﬁrm seeks to launch this quarter. People compare that goal to their actual performance to determine the Performance Gap. Not surprisingly, in the organizations we studied Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 67 FIGURE 1. The “Physics” of Improvement Note:Arrows indicate the direction of causality. Signs (‘+’ or ‘–’) at arrowheads indicate the polarity of relationships: a ‘+’ means that an increase in the independent variable causes the dependent variable to increase, all else being equal (a decrease causes a decrease); similarly, a ‘–’ indicates that an increase in the independent variable causes the dependent variable to decrease (a decrease causes an increase). For more details, see J. Sterman, Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World (New York, NY: Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2000). Investment in Capability Capability Capability Erosion Time Spent Working Actual Performance Performance Gap Desired Performance Time Spent on Improvement DELAY + + + + – it was rare to ﬁnd a process performing above expectations. Instead, managers, workers, and engineers usually faced high and rising demands, sometimes despite downsizing and cuts in resources. They were constantly searching for ways to improve and close the performance gap. Since most organizations are reluctant to increase plant and equipment or hire more staff, managers hoping to close a performance gap have only two basic options. First, they can try to increase the amount of time people actually spend working. Figure 2 shows this option, which forms a balancing feedback, the Work Harder loop B1. The process represented by this loop works as follows: Managers facing a performance gap are under pressure to increase performance. They pressure people to spend more time and energy doing work. An increase in the time spent working increases the performance of the process and closes the per- formance gap. This structure is called a balancing feedback loop because it con- stantly works to balance desired and actual performance. Pressure to do Work includes, most obviously, direct measures such as telling people to work faster or put in overtime, setting more aggressive targets for throughput, and imposing more severe penalties for missing those targets. Pressure also includes more subtle actions designed to extract greater effort from employees. These include the frequency with which performance is reviewed, the detail with which the reviews are conducted, and the seniority of those doing the reviewing. At one company we studied, it was not unusual for senior Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 68 FIGURE 2. The Work Harder Balancing Loop Note:The loop identiﬁer, B1, indicates a negative (balancing) feedback. See J. Sterman, op. cit. Investment in Capability Capability Capability Erosion Time Spent Working Actual Performance Performance Gap Desired Performance Time Spent on Improvement DELAY + + + + + + – Pressure to Do Work B1 Work Harder vice-presidents to review the performance of individual machines on the factory ﬂoor. Not surprisingly, such attention sent a strong message to all involved: keep the machines busy at all costs. Similarly, a project manager we interviewed recalled that when a subsystem for which he was responsible fell behind sched- ule, his boss required him to call in every hour with a status report until the pro- totype met its speciﬁcations. A second option to close a performance gap is to improve the capability of the process. In Figure 3 we represent this option as another balancing feedback process, the Work Smarter loop B2. Here, managers respond to a performance shortfall by increasing the pressure on people to improve capability. They may launch improvement programs, encourage people to experiment with new ideas, and invest in training. If successful, these investments will, with time, yield improvements in process capability, boost throughput, and close the per- formance gap. Of course, everyone knows that it is better to work smarter than to work harder: An hour spent working produces an extra hour’s worth of out- put, while an hour spent on improvement may improve the productivity of every subsequent hour dedicated to production. Yet, despite its obvious and documented beneﬁts, working smarter does have limitations. First, as shown in the diagram, there is often a substantial delay between investing in improve- ment activities and reaping the beneﬁts. Further, the greater the complexity of Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 69 FIGURE 3. The Work Smarter Balancing Loop Investment in Capability Capability Capability Erosion Time Spent Working Actual Performance Performance Gap Desired Performance Time Spent on Improvement + + + + + + + + – Pressure to Do Work B1 Work Harder B2 Work Smarter Pressure to Improve Capability DELAY the process, the longer it takes to improve.8 Second, investments in capability can be risky. Improvement efforts don’t always ﬁnd the root cause of defects, new tools sometimes don’t produce the desired gains, and experiments often fail. While investments in capability might eventually yield large and enduring improvements in productivity, they do little to solve the problems managers face right now. Thus, it is not surprising that managers frequently use the Work Harder loop to both accommodate variations in daily workload and solve pressing prob- lems created by unexpected breakdowns or defects. When a manufacturing line serving an important customer goes down, a manager is unlikely to react by sending the work team to training in reliability improvement. Instead, that manager is going to get the line running and push for overtime until the ship- ment is out the door. Of course when the line is back running and the product has been shipped, the manager should return attention to the improvement activities that will prevent future breakdowns, and make up for the improve- ment time that was lost during the crunch. However, it doesn’t usually happen. Instead, what we repeatedly observe, and what is more difﬁcult to understand, are organizations in which working harder is not merely a means to deal with isolated incidents, but is instead standard operating procedure. Rather than using the work harder loop to occasionally offset daily variations in workload, managers, supervisors, and workers all come to rely constantly on working harder to hit their targets and, consequently, never ﬁnd the time to invest in improvement activities. What starts as a temporary emphasis on working harder quickly becomes routine. The Reinvestment Loop To understand why, it is helpful to consider how working smarter and working harder are connected. The most important interconnection arises because organizations rarely have excess resources. Increasing the pressure to do work leads people to spend less time on non-work related activities like breaks and to put in overtime (that is, they use the Work Harder loop). For knowledge workers such overtime is often unpaid and spills into nights and weekends, stealing time from family and community activities. There are, how- ever, obvious limits to long hours. After a while there is simply no more time. If the performance gap continues to rise, workers have no choice but to reduce the time they spend on improvement as they strive to meet their ever-increasing objectives. Figure 4 adds the connection between pressure to do work and the amount of time spent on improvement. The additional link creates the Reinvestment loop. Unlike those described so far, the Reinvestment loop is a positive feedback that tends to reinforce which- ever behavior currently dominates. An organization that successfully improves its process capability will experience rising performance. As the performance gap falls, workers have even more time to devote to improvement, creating a virtuous cycle of improved capability and increasing attention to improvement. Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 70 Conversely, if managers respond to a throughput gap by increasing work pres- sure, employees increase the amount of time spent working and cut the time spent on improvement. Capability begins to decay. As capability erodes, the per- formance gap grows still more, forcing a further shift towards working harder and away from improvement. Here the reinvestment loop operates as a vicious cycle, driving the organization to ever-higher degrees of work pressure and min- imal levels of process capability. Not surprisingly, such a vicious cycle quickly drives out meaningful improvement activity. Here, for example, is the way a manager in an electronics assembly plant explained the persistent failure of the organization to engage in process improvement: “Supervisors never had time to make improvements or do preventative mainte- nance on their lines . . . they had to spend all their time just trying to keep the line going, but this meant it was always in a state of ﬂux, which, in turn, caused them to want to hold lots of protective inventory, because everything was so unpredictable. A quality problem might not be discovered until we had produced a pile of defective parts. This of course meant we didn’t have time to ﬁgure out why the problem happened in the ﬁrst place, since we were now really behind our production schedule. It was a kind of snowball effect that just kept getting worse.” Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 71 FIGURE 4. The Reinvestment Reinforcing Loop Investment in Capability Capability Capability Erosion Time Spent Working Actual Performance Performance Gap Desired Performance Time Spent on Improvement + + + + + + + + – – Pressure to Do Work B1 Work Harder B2 Work Smarter R1 Reinvestment Pressure to Improve Capability DELAY Note:The loop identiﬁer, R1, indicates a positive (reinforcing) feedback. See J. Sterman, op. cit. Shortcuts and the Capability Trap The Reinvestment loop means a temporary emphasis on one option at the expense of the other is likely to be reinforced and eventually become perma- nent. Organizations that invest in improvement will experience increasing capa- bility and ﬁnd that they have more time to allocate to working smarter and less need for heroic efforts to solve problems by working harder. In the successful initiatives we studied, leadership often worked to strengthen the reinvestment process by explicitly allocating the resources freed up by productivity gains to further improvement. Unfortunately, however, these initiatives were the excep- tion rather than the rule. In most of the organizations in our study the reinvest- ment loop worked as a vicious cycle and prevented improvement programs from getting off the ground. Even when improvement programs yielded initial results, cost and schedule pressures soon tempted many organizations into downsizing or higher performance goals that drained resources away from improvement, weakening the reinvestment loop and causing capability to stall or even fall.9 Understanding why the reinvestment loop typically worked in the down- ward, vicious direction rather than the upward, virtuous direction requires that we add a ﬁnal link to the model (see Figure 5). As discussed above, cutting investments in maintenance and improvement in favor of working harder erodes process capability and hurts performance. However, capability does not drop right away. It takes time for process integrity to depreciate. In the mean- time, the decision to skimp on improvement—skipping improvement team meetings, neglecting to take machines down for scheduled maintenance, or ignoring documentation requirements—boosts the time available to get work done right now. We capture this interconnection by adding a negative link between Time Spent on Improvement and Time Spent Working. When the perfor- mance gap rises and managers resort to increased work pressure, overworked people cut back improvement activity to free still more time for production. The performance gap falls, closing a third feedback that works to balance desired and actual performance. We label this the Shortcuts loop (B3) to capture the idea that increased throughput comes at the cost of departing from standard routines and processes, cutting corners, and reducing the time spent on learning and improvement. Shortcuts are tempting because there is often a substantial delay between cutting corners and the consequent decline in capability. For example, supervi- sors who defer preventive maintenance often experience a “grace period” in which they reap the beneﬁts of increased output (by avoiding scheduled down- time) and save on maintenance costs. Only later, as equipment ages and wears do they begin to experience lower yields and lower uptimes (see section 4). Sim- ilarly, a software engineer who forgoes documentation in favor of completing a project on time incurs few immediate costs; only later, when she returns to ﬁx bugs discovered in testing does she feel the full impact of a decision made weeks or months earlier.10 Thus, the Shortcuts loop is effective in closing the throughput Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 72 gap only because capability does not change immediately when the time dedi- cated to learning and improvement declines. To illustrate these dynamics, Figure 6 shows two simulations of the model in which we show how a hypothetical process reacts to working harder versus working smarter. Both simulations begin in the same equilibrium state. The ﬁrst simulation shows the response to an increased emphasis on working harder. As more effort is dedicated to work, gross throughput immediately rises. Time spent improving falls immediately, but capability does not. Performance therefore rises. The beneﬁt of working harder is, however, short-lived. With less time devoted to improvement, capability gradually erodes, eventually more than offsetting the increased time spent working. Working harder creates a “better- before-worse” situation. Conversely, as seen in the second simulation, increasing the time spent on improvement reduces output in the short run. Eventually, however, capability rises more than enough to offset the drop in work effort and performance is permanently higher, a “worse-before-better” dynamic. The interaction between the balancing Shortcuts loop and the reinforcing reinvestment loop creates a phenomenon we call the Capability Trap and helps explain why organizations often ﬁnd themselves stuck in a vicious cycle of de- clining capability. Managers and workers in need of an immediate performance Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 73 FIGURE 5. The Shortcuts Balancing Loop Investment in Capability Capability Capability Erosion Time Spent Working Actual Performance Performance Gap Desired Performance Time Spent on Improvement + + + + + + + + – – – Pressure to Do Work B1 Work Harder B2 Work Smarter R1 Reinvestment B3 Shortcuts Pressure to Improve Capability DELAY boost can get it by skimping on improvement and maintenance. However, capa- bility eventually declines, causing the Reinvestment loop to work as a vicious cycle. Managers who rely on working harder and shortcuts to meet immediate throughput needs soon ﬁnd the process falling short of its objectives, requiring a further shift towards working harder and away from improvement. To see the capability trap in action, consider how a manufacturing supervisor in an auto Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 74 FIGURE 6. Simulations of the Working Harder and Working Smarter Strategies SYSTEM RESPONSE TO: Time Spent Improving Time Spent Working Time Spent Working Time Spent Improving →Time →Time →Time →Time →Time →Time WORKING HARDER WORKING SMARTER Actual Performance Actual Performance Effort Effort Capability Capability     company explained the inability of her organization to make a commitment to regular improvement activities: “In the minds of the [operations team leaders] they had to hit their pack counts. This meant if you were having a bad day and your yield had fallen . . . you had to run like crazy to hit your target. You could say, ‘you are making 20% garbage, stop the line and ﬁx the problem,’ and they would say, ‘I can’t hit my pack count without running like crazy.’ They could never get ahead of the game.” By keeping the line going rather than stopping to ﬁx the problem, these team leaders relied on the Shortcuts loop to hit their throughput objectives. However, by “running like crazy” they also caused the Reinvestment loop to operate as a vicious cycle, driving the line to a minimal level of capability and forcing them to run ever faster. The capability trap is not limited to manufacturing—we have observed it in ﬁrms ranging from ﬁnancial services to construction. For example, the capability trap prevented a product development organization we studied from developing new processes that would have increased productivity. Like many ﬁrms, they sought to create an engineering library or “bookshelf” of reusable designs and software. However, as described by an engineering manager, “An engineer might not take the time to document her steps or put the results of a simulation on the bookshelf and because of that she saved engineering time and did her project more efﬁciently. But in the long run it prevented us from being able to deploy the reusability concepts that we were looking for.” Just as machine operators and supervisors in the ﬁrst example faced a basic trade-off between producing and improving, development engineers were forced to trade off getting their assigned tasks done against documenting what they learned so that others might beneﬁt. Engineers could make more rapid progress towards their objectives by taking shortcuts and ignoring the bookshelf, but doing so prevented them from initiating the self-reinforcing reinvestment loop that would have led to improved process capability. The Persistence of the Capability Trap Because working harder and taking shortcuts produce more immediate gains and help solve today’s problems, managers unaware of the inherent “better before worse” trade-off are likely to choose them over working smarter. Unfortunately, these temporary gains come at the expense of the long-run health of the process. By pressuring people to work harder, managers often un- wittingly force their organizations into the capability trap where ever-increasing levels of effort are required to maintain performance. Of course, this phenome- non is not limited to large organizations. Many readers will recognize this dynamic in different aspects of their personal lives. In situations ranging from learning how to use a new software package to committing to a new exercise Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 75 program, we often fail to do the things that will improve our long-run produc- tivity and well-being due to the short-run stresses of other obligations. A question naturally arising at this point is: “Wouldn’t managers eventu- ally ﬁgure this out?” While it is understandable that, on occasion, people get caught in the capability trap, wouldn’t they eventually realize the true source of their problems and rebalance their efforts between working harder and working smarter? Unfortunately, the data suggest that overcoming the capability trap is rare. Managers often do not realize how deeply they are trapped in it. Instead, the lessons that people learn when caught in the capability trap often lead to actions that make the situation worse. Faulty Attributions Suppose you are a manager faced with inadequate performance. Your operation is not meeting its objectives and you have to do something about it. As we have outlined so far, you have two basic choices: get people to work harder or get them to work smarter. To decide, you have to make a judgment about the cause of the low performance. If you believe the system is underper- forming due to low capability, then you should focus on working smarter. If, on the other hand, you think that your workers or engineers are a little lazy, undis- ciplined, or just shirking, you need to get them to work harder. How do you decide? Research suggests that people generally assume that cause and effect are closely related in time and space: To explain a puzzling event, we look for another recent, nearby event that might have triggered it. People also tend to assume each event has a single cause, underestimate time delays, and fail to account for feedback processes. How do these causal attribu- tions play out in a work setting? Consider a manager observing a machine oper- ator who is producing an unusually high number of defects. The manager is likely to assume that the worker is at fault: The worker is close in space and time to the production of defects, and other operators have lower defect rates. The true cause, however, may be distant in space and time from the defects it cre- ates. Perhaps the defect is actually the result of an inadequate maintenance procedure or the poor quality of the training program. In this case, the delay between the true cause and the defective output is long, variable, and often unobservable. As a result, managers are likely to conclude that the cause of low throughput is inadequate worker effort or insufﬁcient discipline, rather than features of the process. The attribution of a problem to the characteristics—and character ﬂaws—of individuals in a system rather than to the system in which they ﬁnd themselves is so pervasive that psychologists call it the “fundamental attribution error.”11 Suppose managers conclude that people, not the process, are the source of low performance. Having made such an attribution it makes sense to increase production pressure. As discussed above, an increase in production pressure has two effects. Worker effort immediately rises, closing the performance gap as the manager intended. However, workers are now less able to achieve their Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 76 objectives by increasing the time they spend working. To continue to hit their ever-increasing targets, they eventually resort to shortcuts, cutting the time spent on improvement. However, as highlighted above, the Shortcuts loop, while having the desired effect in the short run, yields a long-run side effect. With less effort dedicated to improvement, capability begins to decline. Performance falls, offsetting the initial gains. By continually increasing throughput objectives in the pursuit of better performance, managers who mistakenly attribute low per- formance to the attitudes and dispositions of their workforce inadvertently force the system into the capability trap. Superstitious Learning The bias towards blaming people rather than the system in which those people are embedded means managers are prone to push their organizations into the capability trap. As workers spend more and more of their time on throughput and cut back on fundamental improvement, shouldn’t managers realize that the true cause of sub-standard performance is low process capability rather than unmotivated workers? Unfortunately, in many situations managers learn the opposite lesson. Managers cannot observe all the activities of the workers. Hence, after they apply production pressure, they cannot easily determine how much of the resulting rise in throughput is due to increased work effort (the Work Harder loop) and how much to cutting back on training, improvement or maintenance (the Shortcuts loop). For example, suppose there is a performance gap requiring an additional six hours of productive effort per person per week. Managers, believing employees are simply not working hard enough, increase production pressure. Workers buckle down, cutting back on breaks, web-surﬁng and other nonproductive time. Suppose these responses yield only two hours per person per week. To close the remaining throughput gap, workers resort to shortcuts and gradually reduce the time they spend on process improvement, training, and experimentation until they free the needed four hours per week. Managers observe that throughput rises by the equivalent of six hours of productive effort. Because managers do not fully observe the reduction in training, experi- mentation, and improvement effort (they fail to account for the Shortcuts loop), they overestimate the impact of their get-tough policy, in our example by as much as a factor of three. The feedback managers receive does not correct the error. To the contrary, managers quickly learn that boosting production pressure works—throughput rose when they turned up the pressure. The gains resulting from production pressure provide powerful evidence conﬁrming their suspicions that workers were not giving their full effort. We call this syndrome the Self-Conﬁrming Attribution Error: Once managers decide that the workforce is the source of their difﬁculties, they take actions that provide convincing and immediate evidence conﬁrming this erroneous attribution. The cycle of self-conﬁrming attributions drives the organization to higher levels of production pressure and fewer resources dedicated to process Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 77 improvement. Far more importantly, however, it gradually changes the mental models of the managers by providing them with increasingly compelling evi- dence that the source of low throughput can be found in the poor attitudes and weak character of the workforce. Recall the project manager discussed above who was required to provide hourly status reports on a balky prototype. Soon afterward the problem was solved, conﬁrming the boss’s belief that he had acted appropriately, indeed had decisively taken charge of the situation, even though the team was already working around the clock and his interference drained precious time from their efforts to solve the problem. More subtly, the long-run effects of production pressure also reinforce managers’ belief that workers are the problem. The delay between increased production pressure and increased throughput (via the Work Harder and Shortcuts loops) is short, and the connection between work effort and output is unam- biguous. In contrast, the erosion of process capability caused by production pressure is delayed, gradual, and diffuse. It is distant in time and space from its cause. Managers are unlikely to attribute the cause of a throughput gap to the pressure they placed on workers months or even years before. Instead, they are likely to conclude that the workers have once again slacked off, requiring another increase in production pressure. Workers often unwittingly conspire in strengthening the managers’ attri- butions. Faced with intense production pressure, people are naturally reluctant to tell supervisors they can’t meet all their objectives. The more effectively work- ers cover up the shortcuts they take to meet their throughput targets, the less aware managers will be of the long-run costs of production pressure. Unaware that improvement activity, maintenance, and problem solving have been cut, throughput appears to rise without requiring any sacriﬁces, reinforcing manage- ment’s attribution that the workers really were not working hard enough. When managers eventually discover these shortcuts, their view of workers as untrust- worthy is conﬁrmed. Managers are then, as they see it, forced to monitor worker effort even more closely (e.g., more frequent status reports, stiffer penalties for missing targets, software for monitoring key-stroke rates of data entry opera- tors). What starts as an erroneous attribution about the skills, effort, and char- acter of the workers becomes true. Managers’ worst fears are realized as a consequence of their own actions. Consistent with our theory, we are not attributing these dynamics to unskilled, inexperienced, or ill-intentioned managers. Rather, the structure of the system inadvertently leads even many talented and dedicated managers into the capability trap, while at the same time providing compelling evidence that the sources of their difﬁculties lie in factors beyond their control, such as lazy workers, a “difﬁcult” union, faulty machinery, or ﬁckle customers. Managers are unlikely to escape the capability trap because they rarely realize they are in it. Instead, as capability stagnates despite repeated attempts at improvement, they slowly, perhaps reluctantly, but with increasing conviction, come to believe that their problems lie in the attitudes and character of the people that work for Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 78 them. Having made such an attribution, the actions they take, while rational from their perspective, make the situation worse. How Superstitious Learning Thwarts Improvement Programs What happens when an organization stuck in the capability trap attempts to implement an improvement program? Performance is low and work pressure intense. In such environments, improvement programs add to the workload— the organization is so far behind that it cannot afford to cut back throughput. Indeed, in many organizations, management imposes aggressive stretch objec- tives for both throughput and improvement in the belief that aggressive goals are needed to shake things up and motivate people. In one ﬁrm we studied, the general manager laid out his goals for improving the product development process by saying: “We need a development process that is fast, is the best in the industry, and it needs to increase throughput by 50% in two years. And everyone must adhere to the same process.” At the same time, they launched many new development projects in anticipation of the expected productivity gains. Viewed through the lens of man- agement’s mental model these decisions were entirely rational. However, that mental model, conditioned by the self-conﬁrming attribution error dynamics discussed above, led them to the erroneous belief that the delay between improvement effort and results was short and that their engineers were under- utilized, undisciplined, unmotivated, and unwilling to adhere to the speciﬁed process. The company spent millions and invested countless person-hours to create a new product development process. The new process included better technical tools, such as improved CAD/CAE/CAM systems, but also increased monitoring, including a structured stage-gate review process and mandated use of project management software. While there were some pockets of success, in most cases the effort had little impact. The leaders of the change effort often attributed its failure to the engineers’ lack of discipline: “Engineers—by trade, deﬁnition, and training—want to forever tweak things. It’s a Wild West culture.”—Manager A “We went through a period where we had so little discipline that we really had the ‘process du jour.’ Get the job done and how you did it was up to you.” —Manager B “A lot of the engineers felt that [the new process] was no value-add and that they should have spent all their time doing engineering and not ﬁlling out project worksheets. It’s brushed off as bureaucratic.”—Manager A “It was fair to say that a lot of engineers viewed this as a neat way to get some fancy tools and to hell with process.”—Manager C Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 79 Yet, when we asked engineers why the effort failed, we got a different story: “We never had time to take the courses and get the equipment we needed to really make this stuff work. . . . It was really exhausting trying to learn how to use the tools and do the design at the same time. ”—Engineer A “People had to do their normal work as well as [use the new project management system]. There just weren’t enough hours in the day, and the work wasn’t going to wait.”—Engineer B “Under this system . . . the new workload was all increase. . . . In some cases your workload could have doubled.”—Engineer C “How did we catch up? We stayed late. Most of the team was working from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. and on weekends. A lot of people worked right through the Christmas vacation.”—Engineer D “The new process is a good one. Someday I’d like to work on a project that actu- ally uses it.”—Engineer E While managers felt the engineers had little interest in following the process, engineers became increasingly frustrated with leaders they felt had no understanding of what was really required to develop new products. Faced with the double bind of hitting aggressive performance targets and equally aggressive improvement targets, they were forced to cut corners while still appearing to follow the process. As one engineer remarked, “In many ways we worked around the [new] system. Good, bad, or indifferent that’s what happened. We had a due date and we did whatever it took to hit it.” As management discovers the engineers’ shortcuts and workarounds, their view that the engineers can’t be trusted is conﬁrmed, and they are forced to step up their monitoring. Faced with similar difﬁculties in its effort to implement a new product development process, a different ﬁrm even created a cadre of “compli- ance managers” whose sole job was to enforce adherence to their new develop- ment process. Workers in such organizations quickly learn to hide problems from oth- ers. In all of the organizations we studied, engineers routinely neglected to reveal the existence of serious design issues for fear of retribution from man- agers. In one ﬁrm, the motto of the development engineers was “never reveal you have a problem until you also have the solution.” In another, engineers called the weekly progress review meetings the “liars’ club”—each participant overstated the progress of his subsystem and hid known defects from others in the hope that others would be discovered ﬁrst, giving them time to catch up.12 The consequence is long delays in the discovery of needed rework, greatly increasing costs, delaying launch, and, often, compromising quality. The capability trap goes beyond low capability and high work pressure. Eventually it gets embedded in deeper structures, including incentives and Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 80 corporate culture. As organizations grow more dependent on ﬁreﬁghting and working harder to solve problems caused by low process capability, they reward and promote those who, through heroic efforts, manage to save troubled pro- jects or keep the line running. Consequently, most organizations reward last- minute problem solving over the learning, training, and improvement activities that prevent such crises in the ﬁrst place. As an engineer at an auto company told us, “Nobody ever gets credit for ﬁxing problems that never happened.” Over time, senior management will increasingly consist of these war heroes, who are likely to groom and favor other can-do people like themselves. As described by a project leader we interviewed, “Our [company] culture rewards the heroes. Frankly, that’s how I got where I’ve gotten. I’ve delivered programs under duress and difﬁcult situations and the reward that comes with that is that you are recognized as someone that can deliver. Those are the opportunities for advancement.” Thus incentives and culture not only reinforce the tendency toward short-run thinking and working harder, but also are themselves shaped by that very short- term focus and work-harder mentality, creating another reinforcing feedback that intensiﬁes the capability trap.13 An organization suffering from the self-conﬁrming attribution error is poorly positioned to escape the capability trap. Improvement programs add stress to the organization, triggering greater work pressure that prevents people from investing in improvement, and encourages shortcuts. In such organizations many improvement programs never get off the ground. If, despite the work pressure, people do succeed in allocating more time to improvement, the result is a short-term drop in performance as time spent working falls before the investments in improvement bear fruit. Observing that performance is not improving, managers conclude the particular improvement method is not work- ing and abandon it. Since the need to improve remains, they search for another, more promising tool, only to ﬁnd it too suffers a similar fate. The result is grow- ing cynicism among employees about “ﬂavor of the month” programs. More insidiously, these dynamics strengthen stereotypes and conﬂicts that not only hurt organizational performance but damage society. Consider, for example, how a senior manager explained why the product development improvement effort he ran had failed: “Program management and the disciplines associated with it continue to be a problem in my opinion in most western cultures. The people that are particularly rigorous and disciplined, the Japanese and the Germans, tend to be so by cultural norms. I can’t tell you if it’s hereditary or society or where it is they get it but the best engineers are those that tend to be the most disciplined, not as individual contributors but as team-based engineers. So there’s a strong push back from the western type of engineer for much of this.” There is no mention of the structural features of the system or the pres- sure, felt throughout the organization, to deliver ambitious projects on time. Nobody Ever Gets Credit for Fixing Problems that Never Happened CALIFORNIA MANAGEMENT REVIEW VOL. 43, NO. 4 SUMMER 2001 81 Instead, this manager blames the failure on the undisciplined character of “Western” engineers. Such attributions, here generalized to entire national groups, and invoking a disturbing racial and ethnic subtext, are typical of the fundamental attribution error. As these attributions are shared and repeated they become institutionalized. They become part of the corporate culture, and, as suggested by the quote above, can strengthen pernicious stereotypes and prej- udices in society at large. Overcoming the Capability Trap So what can be done? The most important implication of our analysis is that our experiences often teach us exactly the wrong lessons about how to maintain and improve the long-term health of the systems in which we work and live. Successful improvement must include a signiﬁcant shift in the mental models of those both leading and participating in an improvement effort. This insight was captured succinctly by one manager in a successful improvement effort: “There are two theories. One says, ‘there’s a problem, let’s ﬁx it.’ The other says ‘we have a problem, someone is screwing up, let’s go beat them up.’ To make improvement, we could no longer embrace the second theory, we had to use the ﬁrst.” Once the cycle of self-conﬁrming attributions is broken, any number of process improvement tools and methods can help improve capability. Without this shift, new tools and techniques, no matter how great their potential, are unlikely to succeed. Breaking the cycle of self-conﬁrming attributions is not easy, but it can be done. The following are examples from two organizations that overcame these difﬁculties and introduced successful improvement efforts.14 Du Pont In 1991, an in-house benchmarking study documented a gap between Du Pont’s maintenance record and those of the best performing com
