---
id: 283
url: https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2025/reproducing-word2vec-with-jax/
title: Reproducing word2vec with JAX - Eli Bendersky's website
domain: eli.thegreenplace.net
source_date: '2025-08-18'
tags:
- ai
- tutorial
- python
- llm
summary: This article demonstrates how to reimplement the word2vec model—a foundational
  2013 machine learning technique for creating semantic word embeddings—using the
  JAX framework. The post explains how embeddings convert words into meaningful dense
  vectors for neural networks, describes the CBOW (Continuous Bag Of Words) architecture
  that predicts center words from context, and provides a clean JAX implementation
  with training code using the text8 dataset. Key takeaways include understanding
  embeddings as the bridge between symbolic words and semantic vector representations,
  and seeing how the relatively simple forward pass and loss computation can be efficiently
  implemented in modern JAX.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Reproducing word2vec with JAX - Eli Bendersky's website

The word2vec model was proposed in a 2013 paper by Google researchers called "Efficient Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space" , and was further refined by additional papers from the same team. It kick-started the modern use of embeddings - dense vector representation of words (and later tokens) for language models. Also, the code - with some instructions - was made available openly . This post reproduces the word2vec results using JAX, and also talks about reproducing it using the original C code (see the Original word2vec code section for that). Embeddings First, a brief introduction to embeddings. Wikipedia has a good definition: In natural language processing, a word embedding is a representation of a word. The embedding is used in text analysis. Typically, the representation is a real-valued vector that encodes the meaning of the word in such a way that the words that are closer in the vector space are expected to be similar in meaning Here's a framework that made sense to me when I was first learning about embeddings many years ago: ML models and NNs specifically are all about vector math. Words in a human language (like English) are just sequences of characters with no semantic meaning (there's nothing in the word "dog" that conveys dog-ness any more than the same concept in other human languages). Also, words have different lengths which isn't convenient. To represent words as vectors, we typically use indices into a vocabulary; equivalently, this can be seen as a one-hot vector with the value at the correct vocabulary index being 1, and the rest 0. This latter vector representation has no semantic meaning either, because "Paris" and "France" will be as different from each other as "Paris" and "Armadillo". Also, these vectors are huge (a typical vocabulary can have tens of thousands of words, just for a single language!) Therefore, we need some magic to convert words into vectors that carry meaning. Embeddings are that magic. They are dense vectors of floats - with typically hundreds or thousands of elements, and serve as representations of these words in high-dimensional space. The word2vec CBOW architecture The word2vec paper proposed two related architectures: CBOW (Continuous Bag Of Words) and Continuous Skip Gram. The two are fairly similar, and in this post I'm going to focus on CBOW. The idea of the CBOW approach is to teach the model to predict a word from its surrounding words. Here's an example with window size of four [1] : The goal here is to have the model predict that "liberty" should be the word in the middle, given the context words in peach-colored boxes. This is an unsupervised model - it learns by consuming text, sliding its window word by word over arbitrary amounts of (properly formatted and sanitized) input. Concretely, the following diagram shows the model architecture; here are the dimensions involved: B: batch (for computational efficiency, whole batches are processed together) V: vocabulary size (the number of unique words in our vocabulary) D: model depth (the size of the dense embedding vectors we're trying to learn) W: window size Here's the flow of data in the forward pass: context is the context words for a given position. For example, in the sample diagram above the context would be of length 8. Each element is an integer representation of a word (its index into the vocabulary). Since we're processing batches, the shape of this array is (B,2W). The context indexes into a projection matrix P , which has the learned embedding per row - one for each word in the vocabulary. The result is projection with shape (B,2W,D). The first two dimensions remain the same (because we still have the same batch and window size), but every integer is replaced with the word's embedding - so an extra dimension is added. Next, a mean (arithmetic average) is taken across the window dimension. The embeddings of all the words in the window are averaged together. The result is (B,D) where each row is the average of the embeddings of 2W words. Finally, the hidden layer matrix H is used to map the dense representation back into a sparse one [2] - this is the prediction of the middle word. Recall that this tries to predict a one-hot encoding of the word's vocabulary index. For training, the loss is calculated by comparing out to the one-hot encoding of the actual target word for this window, and the calculated gradient is propagated backwards to train the model. JAX implementation The JAX implementation of the model described above is clean and compact: @jax . jit def word2vec_forward ( params , context ): """Forward pass of the word2Vec model. context is a (batch_size, 2*window_size) array of word IDs. V is the vocabulary size, D is the embedding dimension. params["projection"] is a (V, D) matrix of word embeddings. params["hidden"] is a (D, V) matrix of weights for the hidden layer. """ # Indexing into (V, D) matrix with a batch of IDs. The output shape # is (batch_size, 2*window_size, D). projection = params [ "projection" ][ context ] # Compute average across the context word. The output shape is # (batch_size, D). avg_projection = jnp . mean ( projection , axis = 1 ) # (batch_size, D) @ (D, V) -> (batch_size, V) hidden = jnp . dot ( avg_projection , params [ "hidden" ]) return hidden @jax . jit def word2vec_loss ( params , target , context ): """Compute the loss of the word2Vec model.""" logits = word2vec_forward ( params , context ) # (batch_size, V) target_onehot = jax . nn . one_hot ( target , logits . shape [ 1 ]) # (batch_size, V) loss = optax . losses . softmax_cross_entropy ( logits , target_onehot ) . mean () return loss Training For training, I've been relying on the same dataset used by the original word2vec code - a 100MB text file downloaded from http://mattmahoney.net/dc/text8.zip This file contains all-lowercase text with no punctuation, so it requires very little cleaning and processing. What it does require for higher-quality training is subsampling : throwing away some of the most common words (e.g. "and", "is", "not" in English), since they appear so much in the text. Here's my code for this: def subsample ( words , threshold = 1e-4 ): """Subsample frequent words, return a new list of words. Follows the subsampling procedure described in the paper "Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality" by Mikolov et al. (2013). """ word_counts = Counter ( words ) total_count = len ( words ) freqs = { word : count / total_count for word , count in word_counts . items ()} # Common words (freq(word) > threshold) are kept with a computed # probability, while rare words are always kept. p_keep = { word : math . sqrt ( threshold / freqs [ word ]) if freqs [ word ] > threshold else 1 for word in word_counts } return [ word for word in words if random . random () < p_keep [ word ]] We also have to create a vocabulary with some limited size: def make_vocabulary ( words , top_k = 20000 ): """Creates a vocabulary from a list of words. Keeps the top_k most common words and assigns an index to each word. The index 0 is reserved for the "<unk>" token. """ word_counts = Counter ( words ) vocab = { "<unk>" : 0 } for word , _ in word_counts . most_common ( top_k - 1 ): vocab [ word ] = len ( vocab ) return vocab The preprocessing step generates the list of subsampled words and the vocabulary, and stores them in a pickle file for future reference. The training loop uses these data to train a model from a random initialization. Pay special attention to the hyper-parameters defined at the top of the train function. I set these to be as close as possible to the original word2vec code: def train ( train_data , vocab ): V = len ( vocab ) D = 200 LEARNING_RATE = 1e-3 WINDOW_SIZE = 8 BATCH_SIZE = 1024 EPOCHS = 25 initializer = jax . nn . initializers . glorot_uniform () params = { "projection" : initializer ( jax . random . PRNGKey ( 501337 ), ( V , D )), "hidden" : initializer ( jax . random . PRNGKey ( 501337 ), ( D , V )), } optimizer = optax . adam ( LEARNING_RATE ) opt_state = optimizer . init ( params ) print ( "Approximate number of batches:" , len ( train_data ) // BATCH_SIZE ) for epoch in range ( EPOCHS ): print ( f "=== Epoch { epoch + 1 } " ) epoch_loss = [] for n , ( target_batch , context_batch ) in enumerate ( generate_train_vectors ( train_data , vocab , window_size = WINDOW_SIZE , batch_size = BATCH_SIZE ) ): # Shuffle the batch. indices = np . random . permutation ( len ( target_batch )) target_batch = target_batch [ indices ] context_batch = context_batch [ indices ] # Compute the loss and gradients; optimize. loss , grads = jax . value_and_grad ( word2vec_loss )( params , target_batch , context_batch ) updates , opt_state = optimizer . update ( grads , opt_state ) params = optax . apply_updates ( params , updates ) epoch_loss . append ( loss ) if n > 0 and n % 1000 == 0 : print ( f "Batch { n } " ) print ( f "Epoch loss: { np . mean ( epoch_loss ) : .2f } " ) checkpoint_filename = f "checkpoint- { epoch : 03 } .pickle" print ( "Saving checkpoint to" , checkpoint_filename ) with open ( checkpoint_filename , "wb" ) as file : pickle . dump ( params , file ) The only thing I'm not showing here is the generate_train_vectors function, as it's not particularly interesting; you can find it in the full code . I don't have a particularly powerful GPU, so on my machine training this model for 25 epochs takes 20-30 minutes. Extracting embeddings and finding word similarities The result of the training is the P and H arrays with trained weights; P is exactly the embedding matrix we need! It maps vocabulary words to their dense embedding representation. Using P , we can create the fun word demos that made word2vec famous. The full code has a script named similar-words.py that does this. Some examples: $ uv run similar-words.py -word paris \ -checkpoint checkpoint.pickle \ -traindata train-data.pickle Words similar to 'paris': paris 1.00 france 0.50 french 0.49
