---
id: 125
url: https://mathoverflow.net/questions/363119/every-mathematician-has-only-a-few-tricks
title: soft question - Every mathematician has only a few tricks - MathOverflow
domain: mathoverflow.net
source_date: '2025-11-29'
tags:
- academic-paper
summary: This MathOverflow discussion explores Gian-Carlo Rota's observation that
  even brilliant mathematicians rely on only a few core techniques repeatedly throughout
  their careers. Rather than listing universal tricks, commenters clarify that Rota's
  point emphasizes that each mathematician develops a personalized set of deeply mastered
  methodsŌĆönot that all mathematicians share the same tricks. The thread showcases
  specific examples including changing the order of summation, simplifying or complicating
  problems strategically, and in combinatorics, adding extra parameters to discover
  patterns.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# soft question - Every mathematician has only a few tricks - MathOverflow

Every mathematician has only a few tricks Ask Question Asked 5 years, 7 months ago Modified 3 months ago Viewed 59k times 198 $\begingroup$ In Gian-Carlo Rota's "Ten lessons I wish I had been taught" he has a section, "Every mathematician has only a few tricks" , where he asserts that even mathematicians like Hilbert have only a few tricks which they use over and over again. Assuming Rota is correct, what are the few tricks that mathematicians use repeatedly? soft-question ho.history-overview big-list big-picture gm.general-mathematics Share Cite Improve this question Follow edited Jan 10, 2024 at 16:09 community wiki 9 revs, 4 users 59% Ivan Meir $\endgroup$ 44 210 $\begingroup$ A mathematician never reveals their tricks. $\endgroup$ Sam Hopkins ŌĆō Sam Hopkins ŌÖ” 2020-06-15 14:39:50 +00:00 Commented Jun 15, 2020 at 14:39 35 $\begingroup$ Going to MO, because that way all the tricks are pooled. $\endgroup$ Michael Engelhardt ŌĆō Michael Engelhardt 2020-06-15 14:43:32 +00:00 Commented Jun 15, 2020 at 14:43 72 $\begingroup$ I once heard a Fields Medallist say that his research consisted of interchanging the order of summation and applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. $\endgroup$ Simon Wadsley ŌĆō Simon Wadsley 2020-06-15 15:38:09 +00:00 Commented Jun 15, 2020 at 15:38 31 $\begingroup$ I am not sure what to expect from answers to this question. I always thought that the point Rota was trying to make was that a mathematician has only a small set of "tricks" that the mathematician has personalized deeply enough to always reach for and use them. Certainly we all "know" a lot more mathematics than a few tricks, but we natively are all truly fluent in a much narrower range than one would naively expect. I thought the point was that the set of techniques was particular to each mathematician. What am I missing here? @MartinSleziak's suggestion for an answer format seems reasonable. $\endgroup$ Jon Bannon ŌĆō Jon Bannon 2020-06-15 22:41:55 +00:00 Commented Jun 15, 2020 at 22:41 21 $\begingroup$ I think this question misunderstands the quote; I'm surprised at so many upvotes. I think the point is that every mathematician has a few tricks that are her own. We don't necessarily know each other's tricks. That's why the observation has some real content.... i.e. it's not that everyone else is super clever and you are average because they too only have a few tricks, it's just that you do not understand their tricks, you only understand your tricks $\endgroup$ SBK ŌĆō SBK 2020-06-16 09:45:18 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 9:45 | Show 39 more comments 47 Answers 47 Sorted by: Reset to default Highest score (default) Date modified (newest first) Date created (oldest first) 1 2 Next 142 $\begingroup$ $$ \sum_{i=1}^m\sum_{j=1}^n a_{i,j}=\sum_{j=1}^n\sum_{i=1}^m a_{i,j} $$ (and its variants for other measure spaces). I still get misty-eyed whenever I read something that capitalizes on this trick in an unpredictable way. Share Cite Improve this answer Follow answered Jun 15, 2020 at 14:53 community wiki Gabe Conant $\endgroup$ 14 23 $\begingroup$ In some ways, Fubini's theorem is just a fancy version of this. $\endgroup$ Gabe K ŌĆō Gabe K 2020-06-15 15:44:27 +00:00 Commented Jun 15, 2020 at 15:44 41 $\begingroup$ I tell my students in basically every class I teach always to pay attention to the order in which a double sum (or double integral, or sum-of-an-integral) first shows up, because chances are, the best thing to do next is change the order of summation/integration. $\endgroup$ Mark Meckes ŌĆō Mark Meckes 2020-06-15 20:23:00 +00:00 Commented Jun 15, 2020 at 20:23 12 $\begingroup$ People have made millions on algorithm speedups based on that. Find a first integral that's stable over repeated calculations, change the order of integration, and voila! your program is several orders of magnitude faster than competitors'. $\endgroup$ Michael ŌĆō Michael 2020-06-15 21:00:06 +00:00 Commented Jun 15, 2020 at 21:00 57 $\begingroup$ Gelfand in one of his paper about integral geometry mentioned the fundamental trick which is version of what you wrote. If $$A\stackrel{\alpha}{\leftarrow} C\stackrel{\beta}{\rightarrow} B$$ and $f$ is a function on $C$, then $$\sum_{a\in A} \sum_{\alpha(c)=a} f(c)=\sum_{b\in B}\sum_{\beta(c)=b} f(c). $$ The inner sums are pushforwards and they have counterparts in other categories. Grothendieck used it succefully when applied to the (derived) category of coherent sheaves. E.g., you can get Poincare-Hopf theorem this way. $\endgroup$ Liviu Nicolaescu ŌĆō Liviu Nicolaescu 2020-06-16 11:41:53 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 11:41 16 $\begingroup$ @LiviuNicolaescu This is very neat. What I wrote is the special case where $A=[m]$, $B=[n]$, $C=[m]\times[n]$, $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are projections, and $f\colon (i,j)\mapsto a_{i,j}$. Thanks Liviu! $\endgroup$ Gabe Conant ŌĆō Gabe Conant 2020-06-16 12:29:03 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 12:29 | Show 9 more comments 106 $\begingroup$ A very useful generic trick: If you can't prove it, make it simpler and prove that instead. An even more useful generic trick: If you can't prove it, make it more complicated and prove that instead! Share Cite Improve this answer Follow answered Jun 15, 2020 at 23:52 community wiki Orntt $\endgroup$ 8 56 $\begingroup$ The first is sometimes attributed to Polya. A related piece of wisdom due to de Giorgi: "If you can't prove your theorem, keep shifting parts of the conclusion to the assumptions, until you can." $\endgroup$ Todd Trimble ŌĆō Todd Trimble 2020-06-16 00:10:39 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 0:10 9 $\begingroup$ "In dealing with mathematical problems, specialization plays, as I believe, a still more important part than generalization. Perhaps in most cases where we unsuccessfully seek the answer to a question, the cause of the failure lies in the fact that problems simpler and easier than the one in hand have been either incompletely solved, or not solved at all. Everything depends, then, on finding those easier problems and on solving them by means of devices as perfect as possible and of concepts capable of generalization... $\endgroup$ Ivan Meir ŌĆō Ivan Meir 2020-06-16 00:12:24 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 0:12 9 $\begingroup$ ...This rule is one of the most important levers for overcoming mathematical difficulties; and it seems to me that it is used almost always, though perhaps unconsciously" ŌĆöDavid Hilbert, ŌĆ£Mathematical ProblemsŌĆØ $\endgroup$ Ivan Meir ŌĆō Ivan Meir 2020-06-16 00:12:47 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 0:12 14 $\begingroup$ These methods can be combined. First generalize the problem, making it more complicated. Then simplify along a different axis. $\endgroup$ Stig Hemmer ŌĆō Stig Hemmer 2020-06-16 07:22:02 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 7:22 6 $\begingroup$ This reminds me of Zeilberger's paper on the method of undetermined generalization and specialization . $\endgroup$ Timothy Chow ŌĆō Timothy Chow 2020-06-16 15:47:55 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 15:47 | Show 3 more comments 88 $\begingroup$ In combinatorics: shove it into OEIS, and see what's up. Also, add more parameters! Note: the Macdonald polynomials were introduced by adding more parameters to the Jack and the Hall-Littlewood polynomials. The introduction of Macdonald polynomials unified a lot of cool stuff, and they are now essential in the field of Diagonal harmonics. Share Cite Improve this answer Follow edited Aug 1, 2021 at 14:39 community wiki 2 revs Per Alexandersson $\endgroup$ 7 9 $\begingroup$ Does "snake oil" count as a trick? $\endgroup$ qwr ŌĆō qwr 2020-06-16 06:36:37 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 6:36 6 $\begingroup$ That's basically the source of my PhD. $\endgroup$ Simon Rose ŌĆō Simon Rose 2020-06-16 18:39:12 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 18:39 5 $\begingroup$ More parameters, meaning "catalytic variables"? $\endgroup$ Somatic Custard ŌĆō Somatic Custard 2020-06-16 21:20:25 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 21:20 5 $\begingroup$ @SomaticCustard Well, the recent example I worked with, mathoverflow.net/questions/362265/ŌĆ” was solved by first generalizing the problem, (adding two additional parameters a and c). $\endgroup$ Per Alexandersson ŌĆō Per Alexandersson 2020-06-16 21:24:24 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 21:24 2 $\begingroup$ @PerAlexandersson Nice! $\endgroup$ Somatic Custard ŌĆō Somatic Custard 2020-06-16 22:36:58 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 22:36 | Show 2 more comments 81 $\begingroup$ Dennis Sullivan used to joke that Mikhail Gromov only knows one thing, the triangle inequality . I would argue that many mathematicians know the triangle inequality but not many are Gromov. Share Cite Improve this answer Follow answered Jun 15, 2020 at 22:10 community wiki KSackel $\endgroup$ 7 13 $\begingroup$ Just in case somebody takes Sullivan's joke literally: I was always amazed how much analysis (including PDEs and functional analysis) Gromov knows. (As well as topology, dynamical systems,...) $\endgroup$ Moishe Kohan ŌĆō Moishe Kohan 2020-06-16 15:13:59 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 15:13 21 $\begingroup$ In 1994, Vladimir Arnold was upset that among the Fields medalists, "three were inequalities manipulators". $\endgroup$ Denis Serre ŌĆō Denis Serre 2020-06-16 16:18:29 +00:00 Commented Jun 16, 2020 at 16:18 43 $\begingroup$ Did Arnold think that number was too high, or too low? $\endgroup$ Harry Wilson ŌĆō Harry Wilson 2020-06-17 19:59:25 +00:00 Commented Jun 17, 2020 at 19:59 7 $\begingroup$ In his book Partial Differential Relations, he showed that he also knows elementary. linear algebra. $\endgroup$ Deane Yang ŌĆō Deane Yang 2020-06-21 00:43:14 +00:00 Commented Jun 21, 2020 at 0:43 5 $\begingroup$ @HarryWilson: just that it's less or equal than the sum of two other numbers of Fields medallists. $\endgroup$ Steve Jessop ŌĆō Steve Jessop 2020-07-04 15:17:03 +00:00 Commented Jul 4, 2020 at 15:17 | Show 2 more comments 62 $\begingroup$ Integration by parts has allegedly earned some people big medals. Share Cite Improve this answer Follow edited Jun
