---
id: 1074
url: https://www.gnu.org/software/stow/
title: 'Stow

  - GNU Project - Free Software Foundation'
domain: www.gnu.org
source_date: '2026-04-27'
tags:
- cli-tool
- devops
summary: GNU Stow is a free software tool that manages symlink farms, allowing separate
  software packages stored in different directories to appear as if they're installed
  in a unified location—making it particularly useful for organizing system-wide and
  per-user software installations from source code. The tool is implemented as a Perl
  script with a command-line interface and is licensed under the GNU General Public
  License, with the latest version (2.4.1) released in September 2024 featuring bug
  fixes and improvements. Users can access documentation, contribute to development,
  and report issues through the project's mailing lists and Savannah repository.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Stow
- GNU Project - Free Software Foundation

Skip to main text JOIN THE FSF GNU Operating System Supported by the Free Software Foundation Site navigation Skip ABOUT GNU PHILOSOPHY LICENSES EDUCATION = SOFTWARE = DISTROS DOCS MALWARE HELP GNU AUDIO & VIDEO GNU ART FUN GNU'S WHO? SOFTWARE DIRECTORY HARDWARE SITEMAP GNU Stow GNU Stow is a symlink farm manager which takes distinct packages of software and/or data located in separate directories on the filesystem, and makes them appear to be installed in the same place. For example, /usr/local/bin could contain symlinks to files within /usr/local/stow/emacs/bin , /usr/local/stow/perl/bin etc., and likewise recursively for any other subdirectories such as .../share , .../man , and so on. This is particularly useful for keeping track of system-wide and per-user installations of software built from source, but can also facilitate a more controlled approach to management of configuration files in the user's home directory , especially when coupled with version control systems . Stow is implemented as a combination of a Perl script providing a CLI interface, and a backend Perl module which does most of the work. Stow is Free Software , licensed under the GNU General Public License . Latest news Sun 8 September 2024 Stow 2.4.1 has been released . This release contains some minor bug-fixes — specifically, fixing the --dotfiles option to work correctly with ignore lists, allowing options in .stowrc with spaces, and avoiding a spurious warning on Perl >= 5.40. There were also some clean-ups and improvements, mostly internal and not visible to users. Read details of what's new. Sun 7 April 2024 Stow 2.4.0 has been released . This release contains some much-wanted bug-fixes — specifically, fixing the --dotfiles option to work with dot-foo directories, and avoiding a spurious warning when unstowing. There were also very many clean-ups and improvements, mostly internal and not visible to users. Read details of what's new. Downloading Stow Stow can be found on the main GNU ftp server: http://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/stow/ (via HTTP) and ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/stow/ (via FTP). It can also be found on the GNU mirrors ; please use a mirror if possible. There is also a git repository containing the latest development code. Documentation Documentation for Stow is available online, as is documentation for most GNU software . You may also find more information about Stow by running info stow or man stow , or by looking at /usr/share/doc/stow/ , /usr/local/doc/stow/ , or similar directories on your system. A brief summary is available by running stow --help . Mailing lists Stow has the following mailing lists: help-stow is for general user help and discussion. stow-devel is used to discuss most aspects of Stow, including development and enhancement requests. bug-stow is for bug reports. Announcements about Stow are posted to info-stow and also, as with most other GNU software, to info-gnu ( archive ). Security reports that should not be made immediately public can be sent directly to the maintainer. If there is no response to an urgent issue, you can escalate to the general security mailing list for advice. The Savannah project also has a mailing lists page. Getting involved Development of Stow, and GNU in general, is a volunteer effort, and you can contribute. For information, please read How to help GNU . If you'd like to get involved, it's a good idea to join the stow-devel mailing list. Bug reporting Please send bug reports to the bug-stow mailing list (see Mailing lists above). Development For development sources and other information, please see the Stow project page at savannah.gnu.org . There is also a stow-devel mailing list (see Mailing lists above). Translating Stow Stow is not currently multi-lingual, but patches would be gratefully accepted. Please e-mail stow-devel if you intend to work on this. Maintainers Stow is currently being maintained by Adam Spiers. Please use the mailing lists for contact. Licensing Stow is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version. BACK TO TOP ▲ “The Free Software Foundation (FSF) is a nonprofit with a worldwide mission to promote computer user freedom. We defend the rights of all software users.” JOIN DONATE SHOP Please send general FSF & GNU inquiries to <gnu@gnu.org> . There are also other ways to contact the FSF. Broken links and other corrections or suggestions can be sent to <bug-stow@gnu.org> . Please see the Translations README for information on coordinating and submitting translations of this article. Copyright © 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996 Bob Glickstein; 2000, 2001 Guillaume Morin; 2007, 2008 Kahlil (Kal) Hodgson; 2009, 2010 Troy Will; 2011 Adam Spiers Copyright © 2016 Free Software Foundation, Inc. This page is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License . Copyright Infringement Notification Updated: $Date: 2024/09/08 22:11:11 $
