---
id: 450
url: https://chriskw.xyz/2025/05/21/Fractal/
title: That fractal that's been up on my wall for 12 years – Chris K. W. – Computer
  stuff and things tangentially related to computer stuff
domain: chriskw.xyz
source_date: '2025-05-23'
tags:
- academic-paper
summary: Chris K.W. explores a fractal pattern he's been displaying on his wall for
  12 years, which he created as a middle school doodle by repeatedly copying and combining
  squares. After gaining more mathematical knowledge, he analyzes the fractal using
  two methods—a "drag and drop" approach and an L-System—and discovers they produce
  slightly different results, with his original version appearing undocumented in
  mathematical literature. He then investigates the fractal's space-filling properties
  through a novel numbering system based on base-5 arithmetic, revealing elegant self-similar
  patterns and connections to how the fractal encodes spatial operations like shifting
  and addition.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# That fractal that's been up on my wall for 12 years – Chris K. W. – Computer stuff and things tangentially related to computer stuff

That fractal that's been up on my wall for 12 years May 21, 2025 Warning: Math, Handwaving I spent a lot of time doodling in middle school in lieu of whatever it is middle schoolers are supposed to be doing. Somewhere between the Cool S ’s and Penrose triangles I stumbled upon a neat way to fill up graph paper by repeatedly combining and copying squares. I suspected there was more to the doodle but wasn’t quite sure how to go about analyzing it. Deciding to delegate to a future version of me that knows more math, I put it up on the wall behind my desk where it has followed me from high school to college to the present day. Anyway, after a series of accidents I am now that future version of me that knows a bit more math. Due to its blooming petal-like structure and timeless presence scotch taped to my wall I’ll be referring to the fractal affectionately as “the wallflower,” although further down we’ll see it’s closely related to some well-known fractals. To start investigating it might help to run through the steps of how middle school me originally drew it: Start with a single square. Tile four copies of the current state to the left, right, top, and bottom of the current state. Tile four copies of the current state slightly angled (about 27 degrees clockwise) from the left, right, top, and bottom of the current state. Alternate between steps 2 and 3 until you run out of graph paper. In animated form: Shoutout to manim and 3Blue1Brown for making this and many other visualizations to come possible! Similar to the Gosper Curve , the steps can be run repeatedly to eventually cover any part of the plane, and each intermediate state can tile the plane. If you have graph paper and free time you can try out the steps for yourself – it’s fun to translate and trace the contour of the previous state and watch things lock into place like a puzzle. Alternatively, a bit over a year ago I realized you could generate the contour using an L-System . The rules are simple and consist of only 90 degree right (\(R\)) and left (\(L\)) turns: Start with 4 right turns: \(RRRR\) Each iteration run the following substitutions: \(R \rightarrow RLR, L \rightarrow RLL\) For example, after applying the first iteration of substitutions you should have \(RLRRLRRLRLR\). The following images demonstrate the first few applications of the rule: Yellow=next turn (going clockwise) will be to the left, Blue=to the right And in animated form: Both methods end up generating equivale– hold up! When I first tried the L-System method a year ago I thought it generated the same contour as the wallflower. In other words, I tried drawing the fourth iteration and its many right angles free hand and gave up partway thinking “well it worked for the first 3 iterations, therefore it works in general \(\text{Q.E.D.}\)” It was only when I started making the animations for this post that I realized the two don’t quite match up. Comparing the 4th iteration from each method: Side by side, the main difference between the two is how the “copies” of the 3rd iteration are placed around the original in the center. The first method (let’s call it “drag and drop”) places the copies directly above, below, etc… around the center, while the L-System method places them diagonally. The contour produced by the L-System approach is already documented in a few places: Wikipedia article for List of fractals (listed as “Quadratic von Koch island”) Wikipedia article for Koch snowflake (listed as “Quadratic Flake”, with file name “ Karperien Flake”) Wikipedia article for Minkowski Sausage Jeffrey Ventrella’s generator for Mandelbrot’s Quartet Meanwhile, the variation made from the drag and drop method doesn’t appear anywhere I can find via Google image search and Wikipedia surfing. Why would one way be so much more common than the other? With some fiddling around I found rules to generate my wall’s version of the fractal (\(L \rightarrow RLR, R \rightarrow LLR\)), however they have a strange effect that seems to “flip” the direction you draw the contour at each step, e.g. the first step goes from \(RRRR\) (majority right turns) to \(LLRLLRLLRLLR\) (majority left turns). Another natural question is if the original L-System doesn’t place copies aligned with the axes, what angle is it placing them at? It turns out the “flipping” behavior, the L-System’s angles, and the seemingly arbitrary “about 27 degrees” from the beginning are connected in a surprising way. But before we get to that, lets take a detour to review an important topic: How to count Procrastinating for over a decade has given me plenty of opportunities to look at the fractal with fresh eyes as I was introduced to new branches of math. During freshman year of college I learned how to show the cardinality of the natural numbers \(\mathbb{N}\) is equal to the cardinality of pairs of natural numbers \(\mathbb{N}^2\) using the Cantor pairing function to “dovetail” across the Cartesian plane. Similarly, I learned you could map the natural numbers onto a spiral to show \(\mathbb{N}\) has the same cardinality as pairs of integers \(\mathbb{Z}^2\). Credit to Wikipedia for the Cantor pairing function image, UCB CS70 for the spiral Both of these reminded me of how the wallflower fills space in the Cartesian plane by building outwards from the origin. To use the wallflower’s structure as a pairing function we would need to find a way to assign an “order” when we place each square, preferably in a way that complements the recursive nature of its construction. A natural starting point would be to use the center of the fractal as 0. From there we can number the surrounding four squares added in the first iteration as 1, 2, 3 and 4 in clockwise order: Now we’re faced with the question of how to label the squares from the next iteration. One way would be to number them in the order they appear scanning from top down, left to right: For lack of better words, this doesn’t feel very fractally – the order here seems unrelated to recursive structure of fractal. What if instead we tried to reuse the “middle out” approach used for 0 to 4? After all, each “petal” is a copy of the first iteration we’ve already given an ordering to. Reusing the clockwise scheme from 0 to 4 within each blue petal, and across each blue petal (the dashed lines): And extending to the next set of petals: As chaotic as it may look at first glance, a few interesting properties emerge if we look at the positions of certain numbers. If we isolate our view to just multiples of 5, a scaled up grid tilted about 27 degrees clockwise is formed: If we only look at the numbers of the form \(5n + 1\), we get the previous grid but scooted up by 1 square: And if we look at just multiples of 25 we get another grid, scaled up even further: The number 5 appears to have a special relationship with the fractal. The reason becomes apparent if you look at the number of squares in each iteration. The 0th iteration is a single square, the first iteration has 5, the second has 25, the third has 125, etc… Since each iteration is constructed by taking the previous state and adding 4 additional copies, it scales up by a factor of 5 in each step. Given the special relationship with multiples of 5 and powers and 5, it’s tempting to redo the labeling while counting in base 5 instead of base 10. Doing so we get this: This is a ton of information, but if we focus in on just the iteration 3 pattern and its copy to the right you might notice something interesting: How to add If you take any number on the left and check 5 spaces to the right, you’ll find its copy on the teal petal. Comparing the numbers between cells, they always seem to be the original value plus 200. For example, 5 spaces to the right of 44 you’ll find 244, and 5 spaces to the right of 3 is 203. In some sense, adding 200 seems to encode “shifting” 5 spaces to the right. This “shifting” property isn’t unique to 200 either: consider the positions of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 relative to 30, 31, 32, 33, and 34. If you stare for long enough you might notice by expanding any number, say 231 = 200 + 30 + 1, we can use each number in the expanded form to find its location on the grid. In this case, we can find vectors corresponding to 200, 30, and 1 on the grid and add them together to get the location of 231: You can test out other numbers using the same strategy of breaking down the number into its 1s, 10s, 100s, etc… places and adding vectors. Assuming this works in general, all we need to find the position of any number on the grid is to know the position of each number in its expanded form, and then add them together. Let’s abuse introduce some notation, defining \(\vec{n}\) as the vector pointing to where the number \(n\) sits on the grid. Using our 1 digit values as an example: \(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{0} &= \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 0 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{1} &= \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{2} &= \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{3} &= \begin{bmatrix} -1 \\ 0 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{4} &= \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ -1 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align}\) With this new notation, we can stare at how “powers of 10” seem to behave: \(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{1} &= \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{10} &= \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 2 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{100} &= \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 5 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{1000} &= \begin{bmatrix} 5 \\ 10 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{10000} &= \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 25 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align},\)\(\begin{align} \overrightarrow{100000} &= \begin{bmatrix} 25 \\ 50 \\ \end{bmatrix} \end{align}\) Looking closely you might pick up on the pattern: \[\begin{equation} \overrighta
