---
id: 429
url: https://blog.swgillespie.me/posts/monorepo-ingredients/
title: The Ingredients of a Productive Monorepo
domain: blog.swgillespie.me
source_date: '2025-05-28'
tags:
- devops
- github-repo
- tutorial
summary: This blog post outlines the essential infrastructure and tools needed to
  successfully implement a monorepo in an organization. The author emphasizes that
  companies should pursue a monorepo for practical reasons like consistency and shared
  tooling—not to replicate the success of tech giants like Google or Meta—and establishes
  the key design principle that all monorepo operations must scale with changes (O(change))
  rather than repository size (O(repo)). The post then discusses critical components
  including source control systems, build tools, and other infrastructure that must
  be optimized to handle monorepo challenges effectively.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Ingredients of a Productive Monorepo

So! Suppose you’re an intrepid engineer in a nascent Developer Productivity team. Your engineering organization has decided that it wants to move towards a monorepo . You’ve heard the stories told of Google, Meta, Uber - each a large technology company with developer productivity organizations consisting of hundreds of engineers - and you want to capture some of their magic in a bottle and give it to your users. You wonder - what work lies ahead of you? I’ve worked in a variety of companies, from gigantic titans to small startups and everything in-between, and I’ve worked in developer infrastructure for almost all of them. My experience is informed by my own successes and failures operating within these companies and trying to solve productivity problems of the developers I served. I’ve observed that a functioning monorepo environment demands the existence of a number of tools that you, dear Developer Productivity engineer, will likely need to write yourself for your company. I have yet to witness a suite of tools that fully solves the set of problems that you will encounter when setting up a monorepo. In this blog post I’m going to enumerate these tools and discuss implementation strategies for them, in the hopes of painting a clear picture of the path that lies ahead for any organization that walks the monorepo path. The absolute first question you must ask yourself, though, is: Why do you want a monorepo? You and your engineering organization must stare at this question deeply and answer it using language that is firmly anchored in your organization’s culture and values. Those blog posts that you read from Google, Facebook, or Uber engineers about how great their monorepo is, and how effective their developers are, and how everybody will be a 10x engineer when you’re done? Purge them from your mind. You WILL NOT end up with an experience as tight as google3 1 or fbsource 2 . You WILL inherit a new set of problems that many-repo setup did not have. You will take steps backward before you take steps forward. These blog posts and the wins they promise are not good reasons to embark on this journey. The cool engineering blogs from these big companies are discussing end states that, while very interesting, are far beyond the capabilities of your company and your small team. You will not have the same outcomes if you attempt to do what they have done. Better reasons to embark on this journey are consistency , organizational coherence , and shared tooling efforts . Your developer productivity gets to focus on improving the experience of working in a single place and can reach more users in the process. Your engineering leadership gets to define and enforce engineering conventions. Engineers working in different organizations can contribute to each other’s codebases with the knowledge that they look and operate the same way. You, intrepid Developer Productivity engineer, have the opportunity and responsibility to pave a path for your colleagues. Let’s get to work. The Golden Rule If you can forgive this abuse of big-O notation , this principle guides all engineering for monorepo-related developer tools: Any operation over your repository that needs to be fast must be O(change) and not O(repo) . As you begin to use your normal sets of tools in a large monorepo, you will find that many tools and processes do not have this property and will cause you problems as your monorepo grows. We will repeatedly come back to this design principle in every section that this blog post discusses. When you see a blog post from a big company talking about some engineering that they did on a developer tool, it is almost always the implementation of this principle in a space in which an O(repo) operation has become a problem. Source Control Perhaps the most obvious consequence of storing all of your source code together in one repository is that, well, all of your source code is stored together. git is the default choice for many software companies today and, despite git being designed as decentralized source control system, many users use git through a software forge such as GitHub or GitLab. The reality is that git was never designed for the centralized monorepo and runs into substantial performance problems when your history gets large or your repo contains many, many files 3 . Your repo probably isn’t big enough to have problems with git . You can push git and GitHub pretty far these days. However, git is (by design) a O(repo) system, and operations such as git status will slow down rapidly as the size of the repository grows. If your monorepo begins to push the limits of git (or GitHub!), you have several paths available to you, each walked by a company that came before you: You walk the path of Microsoft and fork git . You walk the path of Meta and fork Mercurial . You walk the path of Google and write your own , although Google also managed to get pretty far by running Perforce on the most powerful servers that money could buy. These companies chose different technical paths but all chose the same underlying idea. Your scaled-up source control system MUST be able to check out subsets of the repository and be able to operate on those subsets independently of the whole repository. There are essentially two ways to do this: Your source control system subsets the repository and only clones files in that subset whenever you fetch. Files outside of your subset are not present on disk. If you need one of those files, you need to update your subset configuration to include it. Git calls this a sparse checkout . A similar Mercurial extension hg sparse also exists, originally authored by Meta, who used it for many years. Your source control system logically checks out a revision of your repository but does not download anything eagerly. Instead, it presents a virtual filesystem that lazily downloads files on-demand from a central source control server. Repository tools “see” the full repository, but the contents of directories and files are only resolved when accessed. Google, Meta , and Microsoft have implemented this for their respective source control systems. But you probably don’t work at these companies and your repo isn’t going to be this large for a while. Just use git for now and know that, as your company grows, so does your source control problem. The newer source control system Jujutsu is very promising in that it has the extension points in place to admit an open-source implementation of a virtual filesystem; I hope that this comes to life one day. Finally, a practical consideration that amplifies your source control problems is the proliferation of generated code , particularly source generated by IDLs such as protobuf or thrift . If you choose to check-in generated source (which is a practical choice that I’ll go over in the next section), your source control footprint will grow at a rate that’s much larger than the sum total of new code output of your engineers. Building “Aha! This part’s easy - this is what Bazel does!” It’s true that Bazel , the open-source version of the Google-internal Blaze 4 , bills itself as a monorepo build tool that supports a myriad of languages. From a technical perspective, this is generally true. You can, and people do, get Bazel to build monorepos that consist of a bunch of different languages, toolchains, target architectures, and operating systems. The people that do this, though, work on a team that has a name like “The Build Team” and this is their full-time job. My best advice to you is… don’t do that if you can avoid it. Keep your monorepo single-language if you can. Remember, one of our goals for having a monorepo in the first place is consistency , and it’s hard to do that if your engineers are writing code in multiple languages. If you can use your language ecosystem’s build system (if it has one), do it . DO IT . Do it for as long as you POSSIBLY can. You will find that many build tools are O(repo) and tend to scale poorly as repositories grow, but these tools also will work up to scales that will surprise you. You can push Maven/Gradle, CMake, Cargo, and the Go build systems very, very far. Furthermore, if you check-in generated code generated by tools such as protobuf and thrift , you will be able to use your ecosystem’s IDE tools without modification 5 . In a monorepo, you need the following properties from your build system: Given a build target, build that target as efficiently as possible and produce an artifact. Given a list of dirty files, produce the list of build targets that are directly or indirectly dirtied by those changes and need to be re-built. Going back to the O(repo) principle, your build system SHOULD be capable of doing this without interacting with every file in the build graph (as e.g. Make does, when evaluating file modification times). Despite their complexity, Bazel and Buck2 do provide both of these capabilities to those who take the time to invest in their build. If your monorepo consists of a single language (like I said - keep it single language, if you can!) you can write your own program that inspects the build graph of your language ecosystem’s build and performs this calculation. This program is often called a “determinator” or “target determinator”: The guppy Rust crate provides means to traverse the Cargo build graph and build a determinator The golang.org/x/tools/go/packages library provides the means to traverse the package graph of a Go application, making it possible to write a determinator for Go packages If you are using Bazel, this target-determinator CLI and Go library is a determinator. Meta has a sophisticated implementation of a target determinator on top of buck2 , but I don’t believe it is open-source. Bazel and Buck2 offer sophisticated remote execution and caching capabilities, but realistically you aren’t going to need these unless your builds are really, really huge. If they are, go talk to EngFlow or something. The target deter
