---
id: 959
url: https://library.oapen.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.12657/53344/978-3-030-90984-0.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
title: The legibility of Sans Serif and Serif typefaces
domain: library.oapen.org
source_date: '2026-03-27'
tags:
- academic-paper
summary: This academic brief by John T. E. Richardson examines the legibility of serif
  and sans serif typefaces across both printed paper and digital screens, presenting
  research findings on how different typeface characteristics affect reading performance
  and comprehension. The work systematically reviews both objective measurement methods
  (such as reading speed and accuracy) and subjective assessments of typeface legibility,
  while exploring historical typographic conventions and contemporary design practices.
  The research addresses longstanding debates in typography about whether serifs genuinely
  enhance readability or are merely decorative elements, providing evidence-based
  insights relevant to educational materials and digital content design.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The legibility of Sans Serif and Serif typefaces

John T. E. Richardson The Legibility of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces Reading from Paper and Reading from Screens SPRINGER BRIEFS IN EDUCATION SpringerBriefs in Education We are delighted to announce SpringerBriefs in Education, an innovative product type that combines elements of both journals and books. Briefs present concise summaries of cutting-edge research and practical applications in education. Featuring compact volumes of 50 to 125 pages, the SpringerBriefs in Education allow authors to present their ideas and readers to absorb them with a minimal time investment. Briefs are published as part of SpringerŌĆÖs eBook Collection. In addition, Briefs are available for individual print and electronic purchase. SpringerBriefs in Education cover a broad range of educational ’¼üelds such as: Science Education, Higher Education, Educational Psychology, Assessment & Evaluation, Language Education, Mathematics Education, Educational Technology, Medical Education and Educational Policy. SpringerBriefs typically offer an outlet for: ŌĆó An introduction to a (sub)’¼üeld in education summarizing and giving an over- view of theories, issues, core concepts and/or key literature in a particular ’¼üeld ŌĆó A timely report of state-of-the art analytical techniques and instruments in the ’¼üeld of educational research ŌĆó A presentation of core educational concepts ŌĆó An overview of a testing and evaluation method ŌĆó A snapshot of a hot or emerging topic or policy change ŌĆó An in-depth case study ŌĆó A literature review ŌĆó A report/review study of a survey ŌĆó An elaborated thesis Both solicited and unsolicited manuscripts are considered for publication in the SpringerBriefs in Education series. Potential authors are warmly invited to complete and submit the Briefs Author Proposal form. All projects will be submitted to editorial review by editorial advisors. SpringerBriefs are characterized by expedited production schedules with the aim for publication 8 to 12 weeks after acceptance and fast, global electronic dissemination through our online platform SpringerLink. The standard concise author contracts guarantee that: ŌĆó an individual ISBN is assigned to each manuscript ŌĆó each manuscript is copyrighted in the name of the author ŌĆó the author retains the right to post the pre-publication version on his/her website or that of his/her institution More information about this series at https://link.springer.com/bookseries/8914 John T. E. Richardson The Legibility of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces Reading from Paper and Reading from Screens John T. E. Richardson Institute of Educational Technology The Open University Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, UK ISSN 2211-1921 ISSN 2211-193X (electronic) SpringerBriefs in Education ISBN 978-3-030-90983-3 ISBN 978-3-030-90984-0 (eBook) https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-90984-0 ┬® The Author(s) 2022. This book is an open access publication. Open Access This book is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribu- tion and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this book are included in the bookŌĆÖs Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the bookŌĆÖs Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speci’¼üc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af’¼üliations. This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland Dedicated to James Hartley Acknowledgements I am most grateful to Charles Bigelow, Bethan Bolton, Francisco Cano-Garcia, James Clough, Martyn Cooper, Tim Coughlan, Mary Dyson, Robert Edmunds, Matt Elcock, James Hartley, Jason Humphries, Woojung Kim, Agnes Kukulska-Hulme, Christo- pher Lightfoot, Fulvia Mainardis, Marc Marschark, Rod McDonald, Kate Nation, MartaNovello,BartRienties,NorbertSchwarz,OrmondSimpson,RebeccaTreiman, Nicholas Wade, Sue Walker, Arnold Wilkins, Jiyeon Wood, and Gesualdo Zucco for their comments and advice. Any errors, inaccuracies or omissions are my own responsibility. I am also very grateful to James Clough for his kind permission to make use of his photograph of the inscription in honour of Titus Annius Luscus in Fig. 1.3, to the Medical Research Council, as part of UK Research and Innovation, for its kind permission to make use of Fig. 2.1, and to the PhilipŌĆÖs Division of Octopus Publishing Group and Sue Walker for their kind permission to make use of the photograph of pages from Nellie DaleŌĆÖs Reader in Fig. 7.1. Milton Keynes, UK September 2021 John T. E. Richardson vii Contents 1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1.1 The Origins of this Book . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1.2 Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 1.3 Sans Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4 1.4 Review Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 1.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 2 Concepts and Research Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 2.1 Concepts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 2.2 Objective Methods for Measuring the Legibility of Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2.3 Subjective Methods for Measuring the Legibility of Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 2.4 The Size of Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 2.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Part I Reading from Paper 3 ŌĆ£Everybody KnowsŌĆØ: Reading from Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 3.1 Attitudes of Typographers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 3.2 Dissenting Voices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3.3 Are Serifs Purely Decorative? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 3.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 4 The Legibility of Letters and Words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 4.1 Reading Letters and Words in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . 27 4.2 The ŌĆ£StripinessŌĆØ of Printed Words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 4.3 Confusions Among Letters in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . 31 4.4 Measuring Visual Acuity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 4.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 ix x Contents 5 Reading and Comprehending Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 5.1 Reading Text in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 5.2 Comprehending Text in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . 36 5.3 The Connotative Meaning of Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38 5.4 Connotations of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 5.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41 6 Reading in Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 6.1 The Importance of Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 6.2 Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces in Newspaper Headlines . . . . . . . . 44 6.3 WheildonŌĆÖs Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46 6.4 More Recent Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48 6.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 7 Younger and Older Readers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 7.1 Younger Readers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 7.2 Burt and KerrŌĆÖs Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 7.3 ZachrissonŌĆÖs Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 7.4 Other Research with Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 7.5 Letter Reversals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59 7.6 Older Readers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60 7.7 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61 8 Readers with Disabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 8.1 Readers with Visual Impairment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 8.2 ShawŌĆÖs Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 8.3 Children in Special Education . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66 8.4 Readers with Congenital Visual Impairment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 8.5 Readers with Acquired Visual Impairment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68 8.6 Readers with Aphasia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 8.7 Readers with Dyslexia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71 8.8 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 9 General Conclusions to Part I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 9.1 Key Findings from Part I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75 9.2 Preferences and Connotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76 9.3 Implications for Previous Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 9.4 The American Psychological AssociationŌĆÖs Current Position . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77 9.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 Part II Reading from Screens 10 ŌĆ£Everybody KnowsŌĆØ: Reading from Screens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 10.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 10.2 Legibility of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces Using Older Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 Contents xi 10.3 Issues with Screen Technology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88 10.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89 11 The Legibility of Letters and Words . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 11.1 Reading Letters and Words in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . 91 11.2 The ŌĆ£StripinessŌĆØ of Words Displayed on Screens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 11.3 Confusions Among Letters in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . 94 11.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95 12 Reading and Comprehending Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 12.1 Reading Text in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 12.2 Comprehending Text in Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . 99 12.3 Rapid Serial Visual Presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102 12.4 Reading Material on Handheld Devices and Smartphones . . . . . . 103 12.5 Connotations of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104 12.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106 13 Readers with Disabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 13.1 Readers with Visual Impairment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 13.2 Readers with Dyslexia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109 13.3 Readers with Age-Related Macular Degeneration . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110 13.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112 14 Reading Text in Internet Browsers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113 14.1 The Legibility of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces in Internet Browsers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113 14.2 The Research of Bernard and Colleagues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 14.3 Subsequent Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117 14.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121 15 General Conclusions to Part II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 15.1 Key Findings from Part II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123 15.2 Preferences and Connotations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125 15.3 Implications for Previous Assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126 15.4 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127 16 Coda: Lessons Learned . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133 Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151 Subject Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155 Typeface Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159 List of Figures Fig. 1.1 Examples of common serif typefaces (Baskerville, Garamond, Palatino, and Times New Roman) and common sans serif typefaces (Arial, Comic Sans, Tahoma, and Verdana) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Fig. 1.2 The surviving inscription on the base of TrajanŌĆÖs Column. Licensed under the Creative Commons AttributionŌĆō Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0), https://commons. wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Base_columna_trajana.jpg . . . . . . . . . . . 3 Fig. 1.3 An inscription in honour of Titus Annius Luscus. Reproduced by kind permission of James Clough from https://articles.c-a- s-t.com/letter-hunting-in-italy-2-e7b51cd821a6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 Fig. 1.4 A typical Snellen-type chart, used to evaluate visual acuity. Licenced under the Creative Commons attributionŌĆō Share Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0), https://commons. wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=4262200 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7 Fig. 2.1 Key concepts in the measurement of typefaces. From Effects of printing types and formats on the comprehension of scienti’¼üc journals (Applied Psychology Unit Report No. 346), by E. C. Poulton, 1959. UK Medical Research Council, Applied Psychology Unit. Used by kind permission of the Medical Research Council, as part of UK Research and Innovation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 Fig. 7.1 Two pages from one of DaleŌĆÖs Readers. From The Dale readers: Infant reader (new ed.), by N. Dale. 1902. George Philip & Son. In the original, the illustrations and some letters in the sans serif headings were rendered in colour. Reproduced by kind permission of the PhilipŌĆÖs Division of Octopus Publishing Group and Sue Walker from http:// www.bookdata.kidstype.org/database/database/getImage? id=1018 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 xiii xiv List of Figures Fig. 10.1 Examples of common serif typefaces (Times New Roman and Georgia) and common sans serif typefaces (Arial and Verdana) for displaying text on screens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84 Chapter 1 Introduction 1.1 The Origins of this Book Many interesting research projects begin with an apparently simple question. The question with which this project began arose in the context of managing an online course. In 2008, I and a colleague at the UK Open University were charged with designing and implementing a postgraduate distance-learning course with the title Accessible Online Learning: Supporting Disabled Students. The course was to be taken entirely online and would contribute to the UniversityŌĆÖs masterŌĆÖs programme in Online and Distance Education. All the course material was available online, either from a dedi- cated website or through the University libraryŌĆÖs online resources. In particular, the course textbook (Seale, 2006) was available free for students as an e-book. The course would run annually from September to January and would be equivalent to one quarter of a yearŌĆÖs full-time study. We recruited four experienced associate lecturers to serve as tutors for the course. They were each assigned 10ŌĆō20 students, and their duties were to moderate online discussion forums among the group of students and to assess the assignments submitted by each student. The assignments were to be submitted in Microsoft Word format through a dedicated online system, and the students were given advice and instructions with regard to essay structure and referencing. The tutors provided an overall evaluation and mark (out of 100%) on each of the assignments using a sepa- rate form, and they provided more speci’¼üc feedback in the margins of the assignment using WordŌĆÖs ŌĆ£commentŌĆØ facility. During the ’¼ürst presentation of the course in 2008ŌĆō2009, one of the tutors suggested that students should be required to submit their assignments using a sans serif typeface, on the basis that ŌĆ£everybody knewŌĆØ that sans serif typefaces were easier to read on screen and that this would make the task of evaluating the studentsŌĆÖ assignments more ef’¼ücient. This seemed to overlook a number of points regarding the process of learning and assessment: ┬® The Author(s) 2022 J. T. E. Richardson, The Legibility of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces, SpringerBriefs in Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-90984-0_1 1 2 1 Introduction ŌĆó Many students were using the default typeface in Microsoft Word to type their assignments. At the time, this was the serif typeface Times New Roman. ŌĆó The idea that the appearance of written work could be changed to suit the potential readersŌĆÖ abilities, skills, and preferences was introduced during the course. ŌĆó A tutor who downloaded an assignment to provide feedback could change the appearance of the assignment to suit their own abilities, skills, and preferences. ŌĆó Tutors might choose to evaluate assignments on screen, or they could instead choose to print off the assignments to read and evaluate them in hard copy. The last point raised the question of the legibility of serif and sans serif typefaces when they were used to produce material intended to be read on paper or other hard surfaces. Here, a cursory view of the literature suggested that ŌĆ£everybody knewŌĆØ that serif typefaces were easier to read on paper than were sans serif typefaces. Of course, the fact that everybody knows something is no guarantee that it is true. Until the time of the Pythagorean School in the sixth century BC, ŌĆ£everybody knewŌĆØ that the earth was ’¼éat; and until the time of Copernicus in the sixteenth century AD, ŌĆ£everybody knewŌĆØ that the sun rotated around the earth. Nowadays, we expect such matters to be determined by empirical evidence, not by majority opinion. This book is concerned with the empirical evidence concerning the relative legibility of serif typefaces and sans serif typefaces: Part I is concerned with their legibility in ŌĆ£hard copyŌĆØ (i.e., when presented on paper or other hard surfaces), and Part II is concerned with their legibility when presented on computer monitors or other screens. 1.2 Serif Typefaces There are many dimensions on which typefaces can vary, but this book is concerned with the legibility of typefaces with and without serifs. A serif is ŌĆ£a short, light line projecting from the main stroke of a letterŌĆØ (Chicago Manual of Style, 2003, p. 837) that often takes the form of a small ’¼ünishing stroke at the top or bottom of a letter. (In English-speaking countries, typographers have variously spelled the word ceref, ceriph, seriff, seriph, seryph, surriph, surripse, surryph, or syrif: Mosley, 1999, pp. 53, 55.) One feature of typefaces with serifs is that the main strokes constituting each letter are often of varying thickness. The left-hand panel of Fig. 1.1 shows some examples of common serif typefaces (Baskerville, Garamond, Palatino, and Times New Roman) as they are currently rendered in Microsoft Word. (The example sentence is a pangramŌĆöa single sentence that uses all 26 letters in the English alphabetŌĆöwhich is often used as a typing exercise.) Serifs have been noted in Greek inscriptions from the fourth century BC, but they became widely adopted during the Roman Empire (from 27 BC to AD 476) (Mosley, 1999, p. 18), when they are generally thought to have resulted from the practices of Roman masons (Bringhurst, 2019, pp. 119ŌĆō120). It is likely that the latter used a ’¼éat or square-edged brush to draft symbols on pieces of stone before carving them with chisels, and the serifs were left at the ends of the brushstrokes 1.2 Serif Typefaces 3 Fig. 1.1 Examples of common serif typefaces (Baskerville, Garamond, Palatino, and Times New Roman) and common sans serif typefaces (Arial, Comic Sans, Tahoma, and Verdana) (Catich, 1991). By the beginning of the Common Era, Roman inscriptions used a standard alphabet of capital letters in which serifs were a characteristic feature, and many examples have survived in their original locations or else in museums to the present day. A commonly cited example is the inscription on the base of the column that was completed in AD 113 to commemorate the emperor TrajanŌĆÖs victory in the Dacian Wars, shown in Fig. 1.2. The column itself survives largely intact in the otherwise ruined remains of TrajanŌĆÖs forum near the Piazza Venezia in the centre of modern Rome. Smaller versions of these letters were used when writing books. However, towards the end of the eighth century AD, a simpli’¼üed version of this alphabet, nowadays known as the ŌĆ£Carolingian minuscule,ŌĆØ was introduced across the Holy Roman Empire as a standard handwritten script for rendering the Vulgate Bible in Latin. This incorporated strokes that extended above or below the main body of each letter but Fig. 1.2 The surviving inscription on the base of TrajanŌĆÖs Column. Licensed under the Creative Commons AttributionŌĆōShare Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0), https://commons.wikimedia. org/wiki/File:Base_columna_trajana.jpg 4 1 Introduction retained the use of serifs. In the early ’¼üfteenth century, Italian calligraphers combined the Roman capitals with the Carolingian minuscule; these were used as the basis for the earliest Western typefaces and evolved into the combination of uppercase and lowercase alphabets that is used in Western countries today (see Bigelow, 1981, for a more detailed account, of which this is mainly a summary). Due to the origins of their capital letters in inscriptions from the Roman Empire, serif typefaces are sometimes referred to as Roman or roman. For instance, Times New Roman was developed by Stanley Morison, working for the Monotype foundry, for use in the London news- paper, The Times, in 1932. A rival printing company, Linotype, developed a similar typeface known as ŌĆ£Times RomanŌĆØ (or even just as ŌĆ£TimesŌĆØ). Several theories have been put forward regarding why serifs should have survived in modern typography: ŌĆó Early researchers sometimes claimed that serifs provided additional visual cues to enable readers to direct their gaze at successive words in a line of text. This idea can be found even in some modern accounts. However, the work of Hering (1879) and Lamare (1892) showed that the eye movements of experienced readers consist not in a continuous horizontal gaze but in a series of discrete ’¼üxations separated by jumps or ŌĆ£saccadesŌĆØ. (This ’¼ünding is often erroneously attributed to their colleague, Louis ├ēmile Javal: see Wade & Tatler, 2008, for discussion of this issue.) ŌĆó Other early researchers argued that serifs helped to overcome the harmful effects of ŌĆ£irradiationŌĆØ (see Pyke, 1926, pp. 21, 99ŌĆō101, for examples). The latter is a well-established optical illusion whereby a dark ’¼ügure that is presented against a light visual ’¼üeld appears to be larger than an otherwise identical light ’¼ügure that is presented against a dark visual ’¼üeld. Taylor (1934) claimed that irradiation explained why letters printed in serif typefaces were harder to read when shown in white print against a black background than when shown in black print against a whitebackground.Nevertheless,therelevanceofthisphenomenontothelegibility of typefaces is otherwise unclear. ŌĆó Robinson et al. (1971) hypothesised that serifs facilitated the operation of line detectors in the human visual system. They found evidence in support of this idea using a computer model of visual processing. Nevertheless, computational models which assume that speci’¼üc and unique brain cells are dedicated to the detection of lines or other features have since been criticised in favour of connectionist models which assume that groups of brain cells function as a distributed network (e.g., Schiffman, 2000, pp. 83ŌĆō85, 163ŌĆō166). 1.3 Sans Serif Typefaces Sans serif typefaces are presented without serifs. (In English-speaking countries, typographers have variously used the expressions sans-ceriph, sans-serif, sans- surryph, sanserif, and sansserif: Mosley, 1999, p. 53.) In contrast to serif typefaces, the strokes constituting each letter are often of constant thickness. The right-hand 1.3 Sans Serif Typefaces 5 panel of Fig. 1.1 shows examples of common sans serif typefaces (Arial, Comic Sans, Tahoma, and Verdana) as they are currently rendered in Microsoft Word. Early Greek and Etruscan inscriptions routinely employed a sans serif style (Mosley, 1999, p. 17), and they were widely adopted during the Roman Republic (from 509 to 27 BC) (Bringhurst, 2019, p. 261). In contrast to serif inscriptions, rela- tively few examples survive today (Lightfoot, 2009), partly because of the poorer quality of the material in which they were inscribed (wood or local stone, rather than marble) and partly because from time to time the Republican authorities discouraged the construction of inscribed monuments. Nevertheless, the National Archeological Museum in Aquileia in north-eastern Italy contains many Republican inscriptions using sans serif capital letters (Clough, 2015), and about 150 of these are displayed in the online Lupa database (http://lupa.at). Figure 1.3 shows an inscription dating from the middle of the second century BC that was discovered in the area of the Roman forum in Aquileia in 1995. It came from a monument (now lost) to Titus Annius Luscus, who was elected as praetor in 156 and consul in 153 BC. Clough Fig. 1.3 An inscription in honour of Titus Annius Luscus. Reproduced by kind permission of James Clough from https://articles.c-a-s-t.com/letter-hunting-in-italy-2-e7b51cd821a6 6 1 Introduction (2020) provided a more detailed discussion of this inscription. (I am grateful to James Clough for permission to reproduce his photograph of the inscription here.) Sans serif inscriptions had a brief revival in the ’¼üfteenth century, when they were used to decorate buildings and monuments in a number of Italian cities (Clough, 2020; Gray, 1960). The origins of the style are a matter of debate (Stiff, 2005). Nevertheless, these developments had little or no effect on the evolution of early typefaces. Instead, early typographers used serif typefaces modelled on surviving inscriptions from Imperial Rome, and these had become widely adopted by the end of the eighteenth century. During the latter part of the eighteenth century and the early nineteenth century, sans serif inscriptions became popular on monuments, public buildings, and garden features in the United Kingdom, where they were seen as being more natural or prim- itive than serif inscriptions. Between 1800 and 1820, hand-etched sans serif letters were used in publicity materials printed for commercial signwriters or engravers and on the title pages of British catalogues of antiquities, while lowercase sans serif letters were engraved from around 1810. At this time, the style was described as ŌĆ£EgyptianŌĆØ, and it was this term that was used to describe the ’¼ürst uppercase sans serif typeface produced in 1816. However, the ’¼ürst sans serif typeface produced in both uppercase and lowercase in 1832 was described as ŌĆ£sans-serifŌĆØ, and variations of this term were used thereafter. Such typefaces were occasionally referred to as ŌĆ£antiqueŌĆØ or ŌĆ£grotesqueŌĆØ, and the equivalent terms were adopted by typographers in France and Germany, respectively, later in the nineteenth century (see Mosley, 1999, for a more detailed account, of which this paragraph is mainly a summary; see also Mosley, 2007). Possibly in reaction to the popularity of sans serif styles, some printers devised a variant of the serif style in which the serifs were of a similar thickness to the lettersŌĆÖ main strokes. These were used in wood blocks from 1810 and in metal type from 1817. Somewhat confusingly, these typefaces were referred to as ŌĆ£antiqueŌĆØ in the United Kingdom and the United States. However, they were also occasionally referred to as ŌĆ£EgyptianŌĆØ, and the equivalent terms were adopted by typographers in France and Germany. In English-speaking countries, they are nowadays referred to as ŌĆ£slab serifŌĆØ typefaces (Mosley, 1999, pp. 42, 56; 2007). Figure 1.4 shows a typical example of a Snellen chart, used to assess visual acuity (to be discussed in Sect. 4.3). This uses slab serif symbols, each constructed within a 5 ├Ś 5 grid. From the 1830s, sans serif typefaces were widely used in commercial printing (Mosley, 1999, p. 43). Initially, they were mainly used for display purposes (Kinross, 1992, pp. 28ŌĆō29; McLean, 1980, p. 64). Nowadays, as Perea (2013) noted, sans serif typefaces are widely used in many countries for public direction signs, although it caused some controversy when they were introduced for a new motorway (freeway) system in the United Kingdom in 1959 (see Lund, 1999, pp. 126ŌĆō147). Some foundries in the United Kingdom adopted the term ŌĆ£gothicŌĆØ for sans serif typefaces around the middle of the nineteenth century, and this term became generally used in the United States (Mosley, 1999, pp. 55ŌĆō56). There was much global interchange in the evolution of typography, and the distinction between serif and sans serif typefaces appears to be universal in countries that have adopted a Western alphabet (Ovink, 1.3 Sans Serif Typefaces 7 Fig. 1.4 A typical Snellen-type chart, used to evaluate visual acuity. Licenced under the Creative Commons attributionŌĆōShare Alike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0), https://commons.wikimedia.org/ w/index.php?curid=4262200 1938, pp. 188ŌĆō228). More recently, this has been compounded by the hegemony of word-processing software originating in the United States. The distinction between serif and sans serif typefaces applies to most typefaces that are designed for reading over long stretches of text. It is less applicable to other kinds of typeface, such as display typefaces that are designed to attract attention 8 1 Introduction (for instance, in advertisements or logos) and cursive typefaces that are intended to mimic handwriting. 1.4 Review Methodology This book reports the ’¼ündings of a systematic review of research comparing the legibility of serif typefaces and sans serif typefaces. As Uman (2011, p. 57) explained, ŌĆ£narrative reviewsŌĆØ (in other words, conventional literature reviews) can often involve an element of selection bias. They can also be confusing at times, partic- ularly if similar studies have diverging results and conclusions. Systematic reviews, as the name implies, typically involve a detailed and comprehensive plan and search strategy derived a priori, with the goal of reducing bias by identifying, appraising, and synthesizing all relevant studies on a particular topic. Readers may be aware of the systematic reviews from the Cochrane Collaboration, an international organisation created in 1993 to focus on health-related issues. A complementary organisation, the Campbell Collaboration, was established in 2000 to focus on social-related issues (see Noonan & Bj├Ėrndal, 2010). The ’¼ürst stage in any systematic review is to identify a search strategy based upon key terms. This can be simple or complex and in clinical research can involve the speci’¼ücation of inclusion or exclusion criteria. In this case, the aim was to identify all previous studies which had endeavoured to compare the legibility of serif and sans serif typefaces. It was therefore decided to use the single key term serif. ŌĆ£LegibilityŌĆØ is intrinsically a psychological concept with educational applications, but it was recognised that the legibility of serif and sans serif typefaces might vary across particular clinical populations. Accordingly, the following online databases were deemed relevant: ŌĆó APA PsycInfo (https://www.apa.org/pubs/databases/psycinfo; formerly PsycINFO) contains approximately 5 million records, mainly relating to peer-reviewed publications. It subsumes the journal Psychological Abstracts, which went back to 1894, but it also contains some earlier publications. ŌĆó ERIC (https://eric.ed.gov/) is the bibliographic database of the US Education Resources Information Center. It contains more than 1.6 million records of education-related materials. The collection was initiated in 1966, although it contains some earlier material. In the past, authors could use it as a repository for their own material, and so a proportion of the records relates to ŌĆ£greyŌĆØ liter- ature that has not been peer-reviewed. However, with effect from January 2016, ERIC introduced a selection policy that limited new records to material that had undergone some kind of review process. ŌĆó MEDLINE (https://www.nlm.nih.gov/medline/index.html) is the bibliographic database of the US National Library of Medicine. It contains more than 27 million records relating to journal articles in the life sciences with a focus on biomedicine. All three databases are accessible through EBSCO Information Services, which means that they can be searched simultaneously to avoid duplicate results. 1.4 Review Methodology 9 These three databases were searched repeatedly during the period 2019ŌĆō2021 to ’¼ünd publications containing the term serif in their titles, abstracts, keywords, or metadata. This led to a high number of false positives mainly because ŌĆ£SerifŌĆØ is a common ’¼ürst name and family name in Turkey. It was also suspected to lead to a high number of misses, because informally it was noted that some relevant sources were not covered by any of the three databases. The results were therefore used as a basis for the conventional procedures of backward searching and forward searching. The former refers to the examination of previously published sources cited by the obtained hits, while the latter refers to the examination of subsequently published sources that cite one or more of the obtained hits. This process was facilitated by employing the database Web of Science (https://clarivate.com/products/web-of-sci ence/, formerly Web of Knowledge), which enables searching among 79 million cited or citing sources in the form of books, journals, and conference proceedings. When there is suf’¼ücient commonality with regard to research methods, it is possible to integrate the quantitative ’¼ündings of a systematic review using statis- tical techniques, thus yielding a single overall estimate of a difference, variation, or effect size. Such an approach is known as ŌĆ£meta-analysisŌĆØ. A classic example is the analysis of differences between men and women in their performance on particular cognitive tests or similar tasks (for example, see Caplan et al., 1997). Nevertheless, despite the apparently simple nature of the research question, the present literature review yielded extremely diverse methods of data collection and analysis, and this ruled out any formal statistical meta-analysis to integrate the research ’¼ündings from the wide variety of studies that will be described. The alternative approach is to rely on ŌĆ£vote countingŌĆØ (sometimes known as the ŌĆ£box scoreŌĆØ approach). For present purposes, different studies are sorted according to whether their results are statistically signi’¼ücant favouring serif typefaces, statistically signi’¼ücant favouring sans serif typefaces, or not statistically signi’¼ücant, and I shall invite readers to plump for the majority outcome across these three categories in particular tasks, in particular contexts, and in particular subject populations; in other words, I shall focus readersŌĆÖ attention on the most common ’¼ünding or, as statisticians would say, the modal ’¼ünding. Such an approach is not without its hazards (see Caplan, 1979; Maccoby & Jacklin, 1974, pp. 355ŌĆō356), and it can in theory lead to misleading conclusions (see Hedges & Olkin, 1985, pp. 48ŌĆō52). Nevertheless, it has the major advantage over the use of narrative review that the criteria and standards used for the selection and interpretation of individual studies have been made totally explicit, and hence the ’¼ündings can be readily replicated. In fact, in most cases the results are suf’¼üciently unambiguous that readers should have little dif’¼üculty sharing my conclusions. The ’¼ünal methodological point is that there is no reason to think that typographical features have the same consequences when people are reading from paper or other hard surfaces and when they are reading from computer monitors or other screens. It follows that reviews which indiscriminately combine research on reading from paper with research on reading from screens (e.g., Chung, 2020) are unlikely to be informative. Accordingly, Part I of this book reviews the research literature regarding the legibility of serif typefaces and sans serif typefaces when they are used to generate 10 1 Introduction material that is printed on paper, and Part II reviews the research literature regarding the legibility of serif typefaces and sans serif typefaces when they are used to produce material that is to be viewed on display screens or by means of other kinds of technology. 1.5 Conclusions This chapter has introduced the distinction between serif and sans serif typefaces. There seem to be widespread assumptions about their relative legibility both on paper and on screens. The chapter also described the methodology of systematic review employed to address this issue. Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapterŌĆÖs Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the chapterŌĆÖs Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. Chapter 2 Concepts and Research Methods 2.1 Concepts Since the introduction of movable type in Western countries during the ’¼üfteenth century, many thousands of different typefaces have been designed for use in printed material. A typeface can be expressed in several different fonts (bold, italic, etc.) by varying the weight, width, and style of individual characters. Since the seventeenth century, there has been an alternative use of font (and its variant fount) as a synonym for typeface, and this has become more common since the introduction of digital typography (Oxford University Press, n.d.). Nevertheless, for consistency, the words typeface and font will be used in their original senses in this book; thus, a typeface is comprised of a family of related fonts. In Sect. 1.2, for example, Fig. 1.1 showed eight different typefaces, and both the name of each typeface and the example sentence (the pangram) were shown in the typefaceŌĆÖs regular font. Typefaces are designed to be read, and thus an obvious research question is whether different typefaces vary in how legible they are for readers. Readable can be used as a synonym of legible, although there are technical de’¼ünitions of both legibility and readability that go beyond their daily use. Some researchers have used ŌĆ£legibilityŌĆØ to refer to the recognition and the identi’¼ücation of individual letters or words and ŌĆ£readabilityŌĆØ to refer to the reading and the understanding of connected prose. Others have devised ŌĆ£readability formulasŌĆØ to measure the level of mental dif’¼üculty involved in reading speci’¼üc material. Yet others have used ŌĆ£readabilityŌĆØ to refer to the extent to which a typeface is subjectively appealing or comfortable to the reader. Even so, as Chomsky (1970) pointed out, in many current versions of English, readable is much more sharply restricted in meaning than ŌĆ£able to be readŌĆØ: it is instead often used to mean how easy, enjoyable, or engaging a work is to read, as in ŌĆ£This is a most readable novelŌĆØ. (Chomsky explained that this phenomenon was problematic for theories of transformational grammar.) Consequently, legible and legibility will be used throughout this book. The legibility of typefaces is pertinent to a wide variety of everyday settings, but it is particularly relevant for the ’¼üeld of education. First, much of the information ┬® The Author(s) 2022 J. T. E. Richardson, The Legibility of Serif and Sans Serif Typefaces, SpringerBriefs in Education, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-90984-0_2 11 12 2 Concepts and Research Methods that is acquired by students is delivered in books, articles, or other printed documents presented either on paper or computer screens or in printed displays projected using PowerPoint or other software. Second, students often submit their work to be evalu- ated by their teachers or other assessors in the form of word-processed documents, which raises the issue of their legibility for those teachers and assessors, and which led to the question that gave rise to this project. 2.2 Objective Methods for Measuring the Legibility of Typefaces Attempts to measure the legibility of printed material go back at least to the 1880s. Tinker (1963, pp. 5ŌĆō7, 9ŌĆō31) provided a useful summary of the relevant methods of investigation (see also Pyke, 1926, pp. 25ŌĆō34; Reynolds, 1979; Zachrisson, 1965, pp. 44ŌĆō69). The following list of methods is a paraphrase based mainly upon TinkerŌĆÖs account, but it covers most of the techniques that have been used to measure the legibility of printed material. Most of them can be applied equally to measure the legibility of material presented on computer monitors or other screens. ŌĆó Short-exposure method. Printed symbols are brie’¼éy presented (e.g., by means of a tachistoscope, which carefully controls the duration of a presentation using shutters and mirrors) to measure the speed or accuracy with which they can be perceived and reported. ŌĆó Distance method. Printed symbols are presented in clear view but at a distance from the observer. The material is then moved towards the observer in gradual steps to measure the furthest distance at which they can be perceived and reported correctly. A variant is where the observer gradually approaches the stimulus. Similar techniques to compare the legibility of different typefaces have been employed since the eighteenth century (Kinross, 1992, pp. 23ŌĆō24). ŌĆó Perceptibility in peripheral vision. Printed symbols are presented to one side or the other of a central ’¼üxation point to measure the furthest horizontal distance at which they can be perceived and reported correctly. Similar effects can be obtained using the ŌĆ£focal variatorŌĆØ (Weiss, 1917), which uses a system of lenses to project a visual stimulus onto a ground glass screen to varying degrees out of focus. ŌĆó Visibility threshold. Printed symbols are viewed through two photographic ’¼ülters with precise circular gradients of density which are rotated until the material can be perceived and reported correctly. The ’¼ülters reduce the apparent brightness of the material and also lower the contrast between the material and its background (Luckiesh & Moss, 1935, 1942, pp. 71ŌĆō79). ŌĆó Re’¼éex blink method. The observer reads text, and the experimenter counts the number of involuntary eye blinks made during a standard observation interval. This assumes that the blink rate is reduced and the readerŌĆÖs progress faster with more legible text. 2.2 Objective Methods for Measuring the Legibility of Typefaces 13 ŌĆó Rate of work. This covers a variety of tasks including speed of reading, amount read in a speci’¼üed time limit, the time taken to look up speci’¼üc information in printed sources such as telephone numbers or functions in mathematical tables, and output in tasks involving visual discrimination. ŌĆó Eye movements. The observer is asked to read continuous text, and the experi- menter measures the number of ’¼üxations and the number of jumps or saccades between successive ’¼üxations. This assumes that more legible text results in shorter ’¼üxations and fewer saccades. ŌĆó Fatigue in reading. This approach is concerned not with visual fatigue in reading per se, which has proved consistently dif’¼ücult to measure; rather, legibility is de’¼üned in terms of the ease, accuracy, or ef’¼üciency of perceiving printed symbols while reading for understanding. Of course, new technologies to measure legibility have been introduced over the years. For instance, to employ the short-exposure method, Cattell (1885) used a ŌĆ£gravity chronometerŌĆØ in which printed material was obscured by a vertically sliding panel held in place by an electromagnet. On its release, the panel fell, and the material was visible for a brief period of time through a small window in the panel. Cattell found that both uppercase letters and lowercase letters varied considerably in their legibility. More sophisticated tachistoscopes became available in the early twentieth century. Since the 1970s, technology has included cathode-ray tubes and liquid crystal displays, and these will be discussed in Part II. Again, studies of eye movements in reading have become more popular with the use of computer-based eye-tracking devices, and these will also be discussed in Part II. Not only have researchers adopted different methods for measuring the legibility of printed material, but they have presented their participants with different kinds of material: individual letters or other characters; letter strings that do not constitute words; individual words; sequences of unrelated words; strings of words that consti- tutegrammaticalsentences;orcoherentgrammaticalprose.Thematerialstowardsthe beginning of this list afford more opportunity to control the participantsŌĆÖ behaviour, whereas the materials towards the end of the list are more akin to those encountered in everyday reading situations. As in other kinds of educational and psychological research, there is a trade-off between experimental rigour and ŌĆ£ecological validityŌĆØ (i.e., whether the ’¼ündings can be generalised to real-life settings). In particular, Kinross (1992, p. 32) noted that most of the research carried out before the end of the nineteenth century had tested the recognisability of individual letters rather than the legibility of words or passages of text. As he pointed out, it took a change in the theoretical climate around 1900 for legibility to be interpreted as the comprehension of meaning: ŌĆ£not recognition, but reading.ŌĆØ Tinker (1963) went so far
