---
id: 705
url: https://s3data.computerhistory.org/brochures/cray.cray1.1977.102638650.pdf
title: The Cray-1 Computer System, 1977
domain: s3data.computerhistory.org
source_date: '2026-01-13'
tags:
- academic-paper
- compilers
summary: The Cray-1 Computer System, introduced in 1977 by Cray Research, Inc., is
  a large-scale general-purpose supercomputer featuring both vector and scalar processing
  capabilities with a 12.5 nanosecond clock period and the ability to execute over
  80 million floating-point operations per second. Designed primarily for the scientific
  community, it excels at solving complex computational problems in fields such as
  weather forecasting, aircraft design, nuclear research, and seismic analysis that
  require extensive data analysis and physical simulations. The system's configuration
  includes a central processor unit with 72-bit word memory (up to 1 million words
  arranged in 16 banks), twelve functional units, twenty-four input/output channels,
  and innovative error-correction technology, making it capable of performing computations
  previously infeasible for researchers.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Cray-1 Computer System, 1977

THE CRAY-1 COMPUTER SYSTEM THE CRAY - I'COMPUTER SYSTEM The Cray Research, Inc. CRAY-1 Computer System is a large-scale, general-purpose digital computer featuring vector as well as scalar processing, a 12.5 naaosecond clock period, d a 50 nanosecond memory cycle time. The CRAY-1 is able of executing over 80 million floating point operations Even higher rates are possible with programs that age of the vector features of the computer. RAY-1 is an effective host processor for local computer rks and time-sharing networks. Cray Research provides ware and software interfaces that link the CRAY-1 with manufacturer's computer systems. This approach allows to add the CRAY-1 to existing computing facilities. $he CRAY-1 is particularly adapted to the needs of the 'scientific community and is especially useful in solving problems requiring the analysis and predictiw of the behavior of physical phenomena through computer simulation. The fields of weather forecasting, aircraft design, nuclear research, ophysical research, and seismic analysis involve this process. or example, the movements of global air masses for weather recasting, air flows over wing and airframe surfaces for aft design, and the movements of particles for nuclear ch, all lend themselves to such simulations. In each fic field, the equations are known but the solutions require extensive computations involving large quantities of data. The quality of a solution depends heavily on the number of data points that can be considered and the number of computations that can be performed. The CRAY-1 provides I substantial increases with respect to both the number of data points and computations so that researchers can apply the MCU t[7 Functional units MEMORY SECTION 0 . 2 5 M o r O b M w 1 M - MASS STORAGE , FRONT-END COMPUTERS SUBSYSTEM BASIC COMPUTER SYSTEM - - - I CRAY-1 to problems not feasibly solvable in the past. Inputloutput and the CPU share memory access via a single port. 110 priority is sufficient to ensure maintaining the re- CONFIGURATION quired transfer rates for the peripheral devices. The basic configuration of the CRAY-1 consists of the central MEMORY processor unit (CPU), power and cooling equipment, one or The CRAY-1 memory is constructed of 1024-bitLSI chips. Up more minicomputer consoles, and a mass storage (disk) to 1,048,576 (generally referred to as one million) 72-bit subsystem. The CPU holds the computation, memory, and 110 wordsearearranged in 16 banks. Up to 524,288 words can be sections of the computer. A minicomputer serves either as a maintenance control unit or a job entry station. arranged in 8 banks. A word consists of 64 data bits and 8 check bits. The bank cycle time, that is, the time required to remove or insert an element of data in memory, is 50 nano- INPUT/OUTPUT seconds. This short cycle time provides an extremely efficient random-access memory. There is no inherent memory degrada- Input/output is via twenty-four 110 channels, twelve of which tion for 16-bank memories with less than one million words are input and twelve output. Any number of channels may be of memory. active at a given time. For a 16-bit channel, transfer rates of A single-error-correction double error detection (SECDED) 160 million bits per second can be achieved. Higher rates are network assures that data written into memory can be re- possible but in practice, the maximum transfer rate is limited turned to the computation section with consistent precision. by the speed of peripheral devices. There are eight check bits per memory word. Publicatio Number 2240008 B "'lq- F p . q @ !u -JF+&-F~-,~!~ Copyrightb1976, 1977 Cray Research, Inc. ~ a a i , p / - n n . mrJ$< q!.~.-+~ . :kL.$.-n, Integrated oircuits used in Printed circuit board the CRAY-1 computer. module with integrated circuits installed. CRAY-I computer shown with installed banks of printed circuit board modules. Section of the CRAY-1 Data station (equipment computer showing not manufactured by CR I) installation of printed used in the operation circuit board modules. of the CRAY-1. FACIS AND FIGURES COMPUrATION SECTION lnstruction size 16 or 32 bits Repertoire size I 128 instruction codes Clock period 12.5 nsec Instruction stackibuffers 64 words (4096 bits) Functional units twelve: 3 integer add 1 integer multiply 2 shift 2 logical 1 floating add 1 floating multiply 1 reciprocal approx. 1 population count Programmable registers I Max. vector result rate 12.5 nsec Iunit FLOATING POINT COMPUTATION RATES (results per second) Addition 80x 1 0 ~ l s e c Multiplication 80 x lo6 Isec Division 25x 10~1sec Technology bipolar semiconductor Word length 72 bits (64 data, 8 SECDED) Address space 4M words Data path width (bits) I 64 (1 word) I I Cycle time 1. 50 nsec. Size 262.1 44 words or 524,288 words or 1,048,576 words Organization Iinterleave I 16 banks (8 banks optional) Maximum band width ( 80 x lo6words lsec I (5.1 x lo9 bits I secl Error checking SECDED PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS 1 ELECTRONIC TECHNOLOGY Size of CPU cabinet 9 ft diameter base 4.5 ft diameter center 6.5 ft height Weight of mainframe 525 tons I Cooling Freon Plug-in modules 1662 1 Module types 113 1 PC boards 5 layer I Circuitry (equivalent no. 2.5M of transistors) 1 I ~ o g i c 1 I ECL, 1 nsec. I Highdensity logic 551 The computation section as illustrated on page 4 is composed of instruction buffers, registers, and functional units which operate together to execute sequences of instructions. Internal character representation in the CRAY-1 is in ASCII with each &bit word able to accommodate eight characters. Numeric representation is either in two's complement form (24-bit or 64bit) or in 64bit floating point form using a signed magnitude binary coefficient and a biased exponent. Exponent overflow and underflow is caused if the exponent is greater than 577778 or less than 200008.Either of these condi- tions causes an interrupt except where the interrupt has been inhibited. SlGN 2's COMPLEMENT INTEGER (24 BITS) SlGN 2's COMPLEMENT INTEGER (64 BITS) BINARY POINT v SIGN EXPONENT COEFFICIENT SIGNED MAGNITUDE FLOATING POINT (64 BITS) DATA FORMATS Instruction set The CRAY-I executes 128 operation codes as either 16-bit (one parcel) or 32-bit (two-parcel) instructions. Operation codes provide for both scalar and vector processing. In general, an instruction that references registers occupies one parcel; an instruction that references memory occupies two parcels. All of the arithmetic and logical instructions reference registers. Floating point instructions provide for addition, subtraction, multiplication, and reciprocal approximation. The reciprocal approximation instruction allows for the computation of a floating point divide operation using a multiple instruction sequence. ------- -) Execution Instruction Buffers COMPUTATION SECTION 4 Integer or fixed point operations are provided for as follows: 16 BITS integer addition, integer subtraction, and integer multiplica- SHIFT, MASK tion. An integer multiply operation produces a 24-bit result; additions and subtractions produce either 24-bit or 64-bit OPERATION results. No integer divide instruction is provided. The opera- tion can be accomplished through a software algorithm using OPERAND AND floating point hardware. RESULT REG. SHIFT; MASK The instruction set includes Boolean operations for OR, AND, COUNT and exclusive OR and for a mask-controlled merge operation. Shift operations allow the manipulation of 64- or 128-bit operands to produce a 64-bit result. Similar 64-bit arithmetic 16 BITS capability is provided for both scalar and vector processing. ARITHMETIC, LOGICAL Full indexing capability allows the programmer to index throughout memory in either scalar or vector modes of OPERATION processing. This allows matrix operations in vector mode to be performed on rows, on columns, or on the diagonal. RESULT REG. Instructions for scalar population and leading zero counts re- OPERAND turn bit counts based on S register contents to an A register. REG. Corresponding instructions for vector operations are available OPERAND as a special option. REG. Addressing g h i j k rn Instructions that reference data do so on a word basis. Instructions that alter the sequence of instructions being executed, that is, the branch instructions, reference parcels of words. In this case, the lower two bits of an address identify the location of an instruction parcel in a word. 9 ' Instruction buffers All instructions are executed from four instruction buffers, RESULT WORD ADDRESS REG. each consisting of 64 16-bit registers. Associated with each instruction buffer is a base address register that is used to determine if the current instruction resides in a buffer. Since a h i i k the four instruction buffers are large, substantial program segments can reside in them. Forward and backward branching OPE RATION CONSTANT -A within the buffers is possible and the program segments may + 32 BITS be noncontiguous. When the current instruction does not reside in a buffer, one of the instruction buffers is filled from CODE CONSTANT- S I memory. Four memory words are transferred per clock period. me buffer that is filed is the one least recently filled, that is, the buffers are filled in rotation. To allow the current RESULT instruction to issue as soon as possible, the memory word REG. containing the current instruction is among the first four transferred. A parcel counter register (P) points to the next parcel to exit from the buffers. Prior to issue, instruction parcels may be held in the next instruction parcel (NIP), lower 16 BITS CONSTANT instruction parcel (LIP) and cutrent instruction parcel (CIP) registers. Operatingregisters I 32 BITS The CRAY-1 has five sets of registers, three primary and two BRANCH OPERATION intermediate. Primary registers can be accessed directly by b CODE PARCEL ADDRESS functional units. Intermediate registers are not accessible by functional units but act as buffers between primary registers and memory. INSTRUCTION FORMATS The figure on page 4 represents the CRAY-I registers and functional units. The 64 address and 64 scalar intermediate registers can be filled by block transfers from memory. Their purpose is to reduce memory references made by the scalar and address registers. The eight address registers are each 24 bits and can be used to count loops, provide shift counts, and act as index registers in addition to their main use for memory references. The eight 64-bit scalar registers in-addition to contributing operands and receiving results for scalar operations can provide one operand for vector operations. Each of the eight vector (V) registers is actually a set of 64 &bit registers, called elements. The number of vector operations to be performed (that is, the vector length) determines how many of the elements of a register are used to supply operands in a vector set or receive results of the vector operation. The hardware accommodates vectors with lengths up to 64; longer vectors are handled by the software dividing the vector into 64-element segments and a remainder. Associated with the vector registers are a 7-bit vector length register and a 64-bit vector mask register. The vector length register, as its name implies, determines the number of operations performed by a vector instruction. Each bit of the vector mask register corresponds to an element of a V register. The mask is used with vector merge and test instructions to allow operations to be performed on individual vector ele- ments. Supportingregisters In addition to the operating registers, the CPU contains a variety of auxiliary and control registers. For example, there is a channel address (CAI register and a channel limit register (CL) for each 110 channel. - Functional units- Instructions other than simple transmits or control operations are performed by hardware organizations known as functional units. Each of the twelve wiits in the CRAY-1 executes an algorithm or a portion of the irtstruction set. Units are independent. A number of firnctional units can be in operation at one time. A functional unit receives operands from registers and delivers the result to a register when the function has been performed. The units operate essentially in three-address mode with source and destination addressing limited to register designa- ton. All functional units perform their algorithms in a fured amount of time. No delays are possible once the operands have been delivered to the unit. The. amount of time required from delivery of the operands to the unit to the completion of the calculation is termed the "functional unit time" and is measured in 12.5 nsec clock periods. The functional units are all fully segmented. This means that a new set of operands for unrelated computation may enter a functional unit each clock period even though the functional unit time may be more than one clock period. This segmenta- tion is made possible by capturing and holding the information arriving at the unit or moving within the unit at the end of every clock period. The twelve functional units can be arbitrarily assigned to four groups: address, scalar, vector, and floating point. The first three groups each acts in conjunction with one of the three primary register types, to support address, scalar, and vector modes of processing. The fourth group, floating point, can suppod either scalar or vector operations &d will accept operands from or deliver results to scalar or vector registers accordingly. FUNCTIONAL UNITS Unit Time Functional Unit (Clock Periodd Address integer add 2 Address multiply 6 Scalar integer add 3 Scalar logical 1 Scalar shift 2 3 Scalar leading zerolpop count 4 3 Vector integer add 3 Vector logical 2 Vector shift 4 Floating point add 6 Floating point multiply 7 Floating point reciprocal 14 Memory field protection Each object program has a designated field of memory. Field h i t s are defmed by a base address register and a-limit address register. Any attempt to reference instructions or data beyond these Imits results in trange error. The technique employed in the CRAY-1 to switch execution from one program to another is termed the exchange mechanism. A 16-word block of program parameters is maintained for each program. When another propam is to begin execution, an operation known as an exchange sequence is initiated. This sequence causes the prograni parameters f o ~ . the next program to be executed to be exchanged with the information in the operating registers to be saved. The operating register contents are thus saved for the terminating program and entered with data for the new program. Exchange sequences may be initiated automatically upon occurrence of an interrupt condition or may be voluntarily * 6 ~ - ~ o d . r + Ragiston 36 lnterrupt on correctable S Syndrome bits memory error RAB Read address for error 37 lnterrupt on floating point (where B is bank) 38 Interrupt on uncorrectable P Program address memory error BA Baseaddress 39 Monitor mode LA Limit address XA Exchange address F - fl,f V L Vector length 31 Console interrupt 32 RTC interrupt E - Error type (bits0.1) 33 Floating point error 10 Uncorrectabfe memory 34 Operand range 01 Correctable memory 35 Proaram range 36 Memory error R - R e d mod. (bitr 10.111 37 110 interrupt 00 Scalar 38 Error exit 01 I10 3 9 . Normal exit 10 Vector it position from left ofword 11 Fetch EXCHANGE PACKAGE initiated by the user or by the operating system through normal and error exit instructions. Clock period counter Programs can be precisely timed with a real-time clock period counter that increments once each 12.5 nanoseconds. Programmable real-time clock As a special option, the CRAY-1 may be equipped with a programmable real-time clock that has a frequency of 10 MHz and an increment of 100 nanoseconds. SOFTWARE The CRAY-1, as with any other computer system, requires three types of software: an operating system, languagelutility systems, and applications programs. The Operating System The CRAY Operating System is a group of memory or disk resident programs that manages the resources, supewises the running of jobs, and performs inputloutput operations. The operating system is activated through a system dead start operation performed from the MCU. A job usually consists of compilation of a program written in some language such as FORTRAN, loading and execution of the program generated by the compiler, and processing of all output data generated by the job. The operating system is purposely straight-fomCifd and un- complicated to keep system overhead low. The operating sys- tem is multiprogrammed so that a large number of jobs can be in some stage of processing concurrently. Jobs are submitted by front-end (host) computers or at local or remote job entry stations. A job waits on mass storage until the operating sys- tem determines that the resources it requires are available. At this time, the sytem begins processing the job by examining each of the control statements that accompany the job deck and are used to inform the operating system of the tasks to be performed by the job. The control statements are read, in- terpreted, and acted on sequentially. Output from a job is placed on system mass storage. At job completion, this output may be transferred back to the front-end computer or station of job origin for processing such as printing or transfer to magnetic tape. If a job is waiting for resources, operator action, data transfer, or some other action, the operating system may move the job onto mass storage (roll it out) so that some other job can be executed. Job flow is depicted on page 8. Features of the operating system include the following: - Resource management - Remote or local job entry - Multiprogramming of jobs - Management of data sets that suwive from one dead start to another (permanent data sets) - Generation of a chronological history of each job called a log file. It lists each control statement and any encountered. - Communication with station operators - Staging of data sets between system mass storage and peripheral devices suc4 as magnetic tape units. FORTRAN compiler Developed in parallel with the CRAY-1 computer system is a powerful FORTRAN compiler designed to take advantage of the vector capability of the computer. The compiler, itself, determines the need for vectorizing and generates code accordingly removing the burdens of such considerations from the programmer. A significant effort is being made to develop optimizing routines that examine FORTRAN code to see if it can be vectorized. The compiler adheres closely to the ANSI 1966standard. Assembler The Cray Research, Inc. CAL assembler provides users with a 4 means of expressing symbolically all hardware functions of the CPU. Augmenting the instruction repertoire is a set of versatile pseudo instructions that provide users with options for generating macro instructions, organizing programs, and so on. CAL enables the user to tailor programs to the architecture of the CRAY-1. The operating system as well as most othet software provided by Cray Research, Inc. is eoded in GAL assembly language. CRAY-1 COMPUTER SYSTEM rzTD DISK UNITS I 1 Mas Storage Subsystem PRINTER1 PLOTTER Maintenance Control Unit MCU CONSOLE Source program maintenance An UPDATE program provides a means of maintainhg language programs as card images on mass storage - magnetic tape. The user converts the source language programts' to a data set called a library in which each of the original cards43 is assigned a number. Later, when &e user wishes to mod@- - - the card, it is referenced by its number and is accordingly, deleted, replaced, or used for an insertion point of additional -d k? I I I I USER-SUPPLIED I SUPPORTING I EQUIPMENT I I Front-End l'mamor I I I ! DATA FLOW THROUGHSYSTEM I cards. After being corrected, the edited program can be submitted to the FORTRAN compiler or CAL assembler for processing. Corrections can be temporary for the purpose of testing new code or can be permanent. .r Eront-end systems A variety of computer systems produced by other manufac- turers may serve as front-end systems to the CRAY-1. A minimum of one such system is expected to be present. A front-end system may serve as a job entry station for sub- mitting jobs to the CRAY-1 and processing output from jobs or as a data concentrator for multiplexing several remote sta- tions or terminals. In addition, a front-end system may provide operator functions by passing commands and messages between the CRAY-1 and the operator at the front-end system. P A front-end system operates under control of its own operating system in a mode asynchronous to the CRAY-1 computer system The MCU when not used for monitor pur- poses can serve in the capacity of a front-end computer system. Applications programs Applications programs are specialized programs usually written in a source language such as FORTRAN that solve particular user problems. These programs are generally written by customers. Cray Research, Inc. will provide software specialists on a contractual basis to assist customers in the preparation and development of specific applications programs. ARCHITECTURE Construction The CRAY-1 with 16 memory banks is modularly constructed of 1662 modules held by 24 chassis. Each module contains two 6 in. by 8in. printed circuit boards on which are mounted a maximum of 144 integrated circuit packages per board. Emitter coupled logic (ECL) is used throughout. Four basic chip types are used: a high-speed 514 NAND gate, a slow-speed 514 NAND gate, a 16x1 register chip, and a 1024x1 memory chip. Appearance The aesthetics of the machine have not b e ~ n neglected. The CPU is attractively housed in a cylindrical cabinet. The chassis are arranged two per each of the twelve wedge-shaped columns. At the base are the twelve power supplies. The power supply cabinets, which extend outward from the base are vinyl padded to provide seating for computer personnel. The compact mainframe occupies a mere 70 sq. ft. of floor space. Cooling The speed of the CPU is derived largely by keeping wire lengths extremely short in the mainframe. This, in turn, necessitates a dense concentration of components with an accompanying problem of heat dissipation. The Freon cooling system used in the CRAY-1 employs the latest in refrigeration technology to maintain a column temperature of about 68' in the unit. MAINTENANCE CONTROL UNIT (MCU) A 16-bit minicomputer system serves as a maintenance control unit. The MCU performs system initialization and basic recovery for the operating system. Included in the MCU system is a software package that enables the minicomputer to monitor CRAY-1 performance during production hours. EXTERNAL INTERFACE I The CRAY-1 may be interfaced to front-end host systems through special controllers that compensate for differences in channel widths, machine word size, electrical logic levels, and control protocols. The interface is a Cray Research, Inc. product implemented in logic compatible with the host system. =STEM MASS STORAGE System mass storage consists of two or more Cray Research, Inc. DCU-2 Disk Controllers and multiple DD-19 Disk Storage Units. The disk controller is a Cray Research, Inc. product and is implemented in ECL logic similar to that used in the mainframe. Each controller may have four DD-19 disk storage units attached to it. Operational characteristics of the DD-19 units are summarized in the accompanying table. CHARACTERISTICS OF DD-19 DISK STORAGE UNIT Tracks per surface a seam,,, s <>' Bits per sector Number of head groups I Racordingsurfaces per drive . . 18 32,76% 10 0 I t w I time Dafa trans* rate (average bits per sm.1 II 15-80- 35.4 x lo6 II 1 Total bits that can be dreamed to a unit 5.9 x lo6 (disk eylinder capacity) MAINTENANCE SERVICES Cray Research, Inc. provides resident maintenance engineers on a contractual basis. CRAY-1 INSTRUCTION SET CRAy-1 - CAL OOOxxx ERR tOOOijk ERR OOlOjk CA.Aj 0020xk VL t0020x0 VL 0021xx EFI OOZZXX DFI 003xjx VM tOO4ijk EX OOSxj k J OOdijkm J 007ijkm R 010ijkm JAZ Ollijkm JAN C0 OlZijkm JAP O13ijkm JAM 014ijkm JSZ OlSijkm JSN Ol6i j km JSP Ol7ijkm JSM OZOijkm OWijkm Ai O22ijk 1 023ijx Ai Sj 024ijk Ai Bj k 025ijk Bjk Ai 026ijx Ai PS j 027ijx Ai ZSj O3Oijk Ai Aj +Ak CI CA. Aj CE ,Aj ,A0 DESCRIPTION Error exit Error exit Set the channel (Aj) current address to (Ak) and begin the 1/0 sequence Set the channel (Aj) limit address to (Ak) Clear channel (Aj) interrupt fiag Enter XA register with (Aj) Enter real-time clock register with (Sj) Transmit (Ak) to VL register Transmit 1 to VL register Enable interrupt on floating point error Disable interrupt on floating point error Transmit (Sj) to VM register Clear VM register Normal exit Normal exit Jump to (Bjk) Jump to exp Return jump to exp; set BOO to P Branch to exp if (AO) = 0 . Branch to exp if (AO) f 0 Branch to exp if (AO) positive Branch to exp if (AO) negative Branch to exp if (SO) = 0 Branch to exp if (SO) f 0 Branch to exp if (SO) positive Branch to exp if (SO) negative Transmit exp = jkm to Ai Transmit exp = 1's complement of jkm to Ai Transmit exp = jk to Ai Transmit (Sj) to Ai Transmit (Bjk) to Ai Transmit (Ai) to Bjk Population count of (Sj) to Ai Leading zero count of (Sj) to Ai Integer sum of (Aj) and (Ak) to Ai Transmit (Ak) to Ai Integer sum of (Aj) and 1 to Ai Integer difference of (Aj) less (Ak) to Ai Transmit -1 to Ai Transmit the negative of (Ak) to Ai Ir-teger difference of (Aj) less 1 to Ai Integer product of (Aj) and (Ak) to Ai Channel number to Ai (j-0) Address of channel (Aj) to Ai (j+O; k-0) Error flag of channel (Aj) to Ai (jfO; k-1) Read (Ai) words to B register jk from (AO) Read (Ai) words to B register jk from (AO) Store (Ai) words at B register jk to (AO) 071i3x 071i4x 071i5x 071i6x 071i7x 072ixx 073ixx O74ijk 075ijk 076ijk 077ijk t077iOk lOhi j km tlOOijkm tlOOijkm tlOhiOOO llhi j km tll0ijkm tlloijkm tllhiOOO l2hijkm t12Oijkm tl2Oijkm t12hi000 13hijkm t130ijkm tl30ijkm t13hi000 14Oijk t140iOO l4lijk 142ijk t142iOk 143ijk DESCRIPTION Floating sum of (Sj) and (Sk) to Si Normalize (Sk) to Si Floating difference of (Sj) and (Sk) to Si Transmit normalized negative of (Sk) to Si Floating product of (Sj) and (Sk) to Si Half precision rounded floating product of (Sj) and (Sk) to Si Full precision rounded floating product of (Sj) and (Sk) to Si 2 - Floating product of (Sj) and (Sk) to Si Floating reciprocal approximation of (Sj) to Si Transmit (Ak) to Si with no sign extension Transmit (Ak) to Si with sign extension Transmit (Ak) to Si as unnormalized floating point number Transmit constant 0.75*2**48 to Si Transmit constant 0.5 to Si Transmit constant 1.0 to Si Transmit constant 2.0 to Si Transmit constant 4.0 to Si Transmit (RTC) to Si Transmit (VM) to Si Transmit (Tjk) to Si Transmit (Si) to Tjk Transmit (Vj, element (Ak)) to Si Transmit (Sj) to Vi element (Ak) Clear Vi element (Ak) Read from ((Ah) + exp) to Ai (AO-0) Read from (exp) to Ai Read from (exp) to Ai Read from (Ah) to Ai exp ,Ah Store (Ai) to (Ah) + exp (AO-0) Store (Ai) to exp Store (Ai) to exp Store (Ai) to (Ah) Read from ((Ah) + exp) to Si [AO=O) Read from exp to Si Read from exp to Si Read from (Ah) to Si Store (Si) to (Ah) + exp (AO-0) Store (Si) to exp Store (Si) to exp Store (Si) to (Ah) Logical products of (Sj) and (Vk] to Vi Clear Vi Logical products of (Vj) and (Vk) to Vi Logical sums of (Sj) and (Vk) to Vi Transmit (Vk) to Vi Logical sums of (Vj) and (Vk) to Vi 0AJSD Tjl,Ai Tjk,Ai exP ;zp f. - 1 Sexp Ucexp 0 sj esk s jess SB&Sj tSk&Sj tSB&Sj S j U k sns3 SB\Sj tSj\Sk #Sk #S j\SB tSB\Sj USB Sj !Si%Sk Read (a] wurds t e T ragister jk from (A03 Store [Ail words a t T r e g i s t e r jk t o (AO) Store (Ai) words a t T register jk t o [AO) Transmit jkm t o Si. Transmit exp - 1's comple~lcmt of jkm t o Si Form 1's mask exp 64-jk b i t s in Si from Sj !Vk&w~ Transmit (Sj) i f VM b i t = 1; (Vlt) i f VM b i t = 0 t o V i tVMi3vk Vector merge of /Vk) and 0 t o V i Vj !Vk$VM Transmit (Vj] i f VM b i t * 1; (Vk) i f VH b i t = 0 t o V i Vj<Ak S h i f t (Vj) l e f t [Ak) places t o Vi Vj<l S h i f t Wj) l e f t m e place t o V i Vj>Ak S h i f t (Vj) right (Ak) places t o V i Vj>l Shift (Vj] right one place t o V i Vj ,Vj<Ak Double s h i f t [Vj) l e f t (Kk) places t o Vi the right Enter 1 inte Si Enter -1 into S i Fom 1's mask exp - jk the l e f t Clear S i Logical product of (Sj] Sign b i t of (Sj) ta SS Sign b i t ef (Sj) t o S i Logical product of (Sj) b i t s i n S i fro@ and (Sk) t o S i (jZ0) aad 1's Vj ,vj+l v j ,Vj>Ak Vj,Qj>l $j+Vk Vj*W Sj-rn -a Vj-Vk $j*m Vj*- Sj*W Vj*HVk s j * ~ V k Vj ,Z j Vj,P Oj .b$ ,A@,@ ,h0,1 177xjk ,RO,AP Vj t177xjO 0 Vj Double s h i f t (Vj) l e f t m e place t o Vi Double s h i f t (Vj 1 right [Ak) places t o Vi Double s h i f t (Vj) right one place t o Vi Integsr sums of ($1) and (m) t o V i Integer sums of (Vj) and (Vk) t o Vi Integer differences of (Sj) and (Vk) t o Vi Transmit negative of (Vk) t o Vi lnteger differences of (Vj) and (Vk] t e V i Floating products of (Sj] and (\rtl t o Vi FZoating producOs of (Vj) and [a)t o Vi Half precision ratsnded flmating p ~ ~ d u c t s uf [Sj) and (Vk) t o Vi Half p m c i s i o n r ~ d s d f l o a t i a g p r o d u c t s of [Vj) and (Vk) t o V i Rounded floating products of (Sj) and (Vk] t o Vi Rounded floating products of {V.j] and complement of (sk) t o si (SjJ with sign b i t t l e a ~ dtta S i Logical difference of [Sj) and Cgfr) t o S i Taggle sign b i t of $5, then enter i n t o S i T o ~ g l e sign b i t o-f Sj, then enter into S i (j/Q) Logical equivalence oQ (Sk) and CSjj t o Si Transmit 1 ' s camplemeat of (Sk) t o S i Logical equi.palence of ISj) an& sign b i t to Sf Logical equivalence of [SjJ snd sign b i t t o S i [jfo) Enter 1's complement of sign b i t into S i Logical product of (Si) and CSk] c~o~lpleste;n& 6Red with Logical pmdurt of [S)) gtyd (Wte S i Scalsr merge of [Si) and sied hbt of f S j j t o S i Logical sum of ISf 1 and @k) te ST Tranaait (Sk) to S i Logical sum of (Sjf and sign b i t ao 5k (Vk) t o V i 2 - floating products of (Sj) and (Vk) t o Vi 2 - floating products of (Vj) end (vk) t o Vi Floating sums of (Sj) and (Vk) t o V i Noraalize (Vk] t o V i Floating sums of (Vj) and [Vk) t o V i Floating differences of (Sj) and (Vk) Tramrait normalized negatives of (Vk) Flestisg differences of (Vj) and (Vk) Floating reciprocal approximations of (Vj] t o V i where (Vj) = 0 VM=l where (Vj) f 0 -1 where (Vj) positive -1 where [Vj) negative &ad (VL) words t o V i frcm (AO) iacramenttd by (Ak) Read (VL) uords t o V i from (A01 incramented by 1 Store (VC) words from Vj t o (AO) incrementeQ by (Ak) Store (VL] words from Vj t o (AO) ineremnted by 1 Sj!SigSB Sj!Sk Sk Sj!SB SB!Sj SB Sic exp Si,exp Sieexp Si>erp Si,SjcAk ST,Sj<I tO57iOk S i &i4Ak Sj.M * sg,am Sf.?& O&Oijk 06lijk fO6liOk Si S i S i 5j*Sk Sj-SL -Ws t o V i t o V i t 6 Vi Logical sun of (Sj] and sign b i t te S i [$+a) Enter sign b i t i n t o S i Shift (Si) l e f t exp = jk places t o SO Shift fSi) right exp * 64-jk places te 9 Shift (Si) l e f t exp = jk places Shift (Si) right exp = 64-jk places S h i f t [Si and Sj) l e f t (Ak) prolces t o S i S h i f t (Si and Sj) l e f t @nt p l a ~ e t o S i Shift [Si) l e f t (dk3 places &o S i Sbift (Sj and Si) right (Ak3 ptages t o S i Shift (Sj sad Si) rig&+ me place t o S i Shift C51] r i g k t (Ak) places t o S i Integer stm af (Sj am! (Sk] .t;c 8 i Intwgeur BiScb-senrn M /Sj] a d fSk) t o S i T r m s i ~ i tnegative .at' CSk] t o S i Cray Research, Inc. Corporate Addresses I I f<s.neraI Officer Corporate Headquart8rs 1440 Northland Drive Mendota Heights, Minnesota 55120 w Manufactur!ng Industrial Park Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin 54279 # f Safes o f f i i 5 Dommic Eastern Rqional Sales 10750 Columbia Pike, Suite 602 Silver Spring, Maryland 20901 * w Central Regional Sales 1440 Northland Drive Mendom Heights. Minnesota 551 20 - . - < Z ,----. -- - -3-z . A:-- .. - . - - . . ,=- , -:A Mountain Regional Sates 75 Manhattan Drive, Suite 3 Boulder, Colorado 80303 Houston District (Petroleum) 3121 Buffalo Speedway, Suite 400 Houston, Texas 77098 w Western Regional Sales 10l%ontinental Boulevard, Suite 456 El Segindo, California 90245 Seattle District 536A Medical and Dental Building Evsrett, Washington 98201 Rt International Cray Research (U.K.) Limited James Glaisher House Grenville Place Bracknell, England \ /
