---
id: 523
url: https://littleosbook.github.io/
title: The little book about OS development
domain: littleosbook.github.io
source_date: '2025-03-21'
tags:
- tutorial
- c
- compilers
summary: '"The Little Book About OS Development" is a practical, hands-on guide for
  building a simple x86 operating system from scratch, designed for readers with systems
  programming experience. The book progresses from setting up a development environment
  and booting a kernel, through fundamental concepts like memory management and interrupts,
  to advanced topics like file systems and multitasking. Written as a tutorial based
  on the authors'' six-week OS development project, it balances technical depth with
  incremental learning, encouraging readers to build and test their OS step-by-step
  rather than focusing on theoretical concepts.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The little book about OS development

The little book about OS development Erik Helin, Adam Renberg 2015-01-19 | Commit: fe83e27dab3c39930354d2dea83f6d4ee2928212 PDF version Contents 1 Introduction 1.1 About the Book 1.2 The Reader 1.3 Credits, Thanks and Acknowledgements 1.4 Contributors 1.5 Changes and Corrections 1.6 Issues and where to get help 1.7 License 2 First Steps 2.1 Tools 2.1.1 Quick Setup 2.1.2 Programming Languages 2.1.3 Host Operating System 2.1.4 Build System 2.1.5 Virtual Machine 2.2 Booting 2.2.1 BIOS 2.2.2 The Bootloader 2.2.3 The Operating System 2.3 Hello Cafebabe 2.3.1 Compiling the Operating System 2.3.2 Linking the Kernel 2.3.3 Obtaining GRUB 2.3.4 Building an ISO Image 2.3.5 Running Bochs 2.4 Further Reading 3 Getting to C 3.1 Setting Up a Stack 3.2 Calling C Code From Assembly 3.2.1 Packing Structs 3.3 Compiling C Code 3.4 Build Tools 3.5 Further Reading 4 Output 4.1 Interacting with the Hardware 4.2 The Framebuffer 4.2.1 Writing Text 4.2.2 Moving the Cursor 4.2.3 The Driver 4.3 The Serial Ports 4.3.1 Configuring the Serial Port 4.3.2 Configuring the Line 4.3.3 Configuring the Buffers 4.3.4 Configuring the Modem 4.3.5 Writing Data to the Serial Port 4.3.6 Configuring Bochs 4.3.7 The Driver 4.4 Further Reading 5 Segmentation 5.1 Accessing Memory 5.2 The Global Descriptor Table (GDT) 5.3 Loading the GDT 5.4 Further Reading 6 Interrupts and Input 6.1 Interrupts Handlers 6.2 Creating an Entry in the IDT 6.3 Handling an Interrupt 6.4 Creating a Generic Interrupt Handler 6.5 Loading the IDT 6.6 Programmable Interrupt Controller (PIC) 6.7 Reading Input from the Keyboard 6.8 Further Reading 7 The Road to User Mode 7.1 Loading an External Program 7.1.1 GRUB Modules 7.2 Executing a Program 7.2.1 A Very Simple Program 7.2.2 Compiling 7.2.3 Finding the Program in Memory 7.2.4 Jumping to the Code 7.3 The Beginning of User Mode 8 A Short Introduction to Virtual Memory 8.1 Virtual Memory Through Segmentation? 8.2 Further Reading 9 Paging 9.1 Why Paging? 9.2 Paging in x86 9.2.1 Identity Paging 9.2.2 Enabling Paging 9.2.3 A Few Details 9.3 Paging and the Kernel 9.3.1 Reasons to Not Identity Map the Kernel 9.3.2 The Virtual Address for the Kernel 9.3.3 Placing the Kernel at 0xC0000000 9.3.4 Higher-half Linker Script 9.3.5 Entering the Higher Half 9.3.6 Running in the Higher Half 9.4 Virtual Memory Through Paging 9.5 Further Reading 10 Page Frame Allocation 10.1 Managing Available Memory 10.1.1 How Much Memory is There? 10.1.2 Managing Available Memory 10.2 How Can We Access a Page Frame? 10.3 A Kernel Heap 10.4 Further reading 11 User Mode 11.1 Segments for User Mode 11.2 Setting Up For User Mode 11.3 Entering User Mode 11.4 Using C for User Mode Programs 11.4.1 A C Library 11.5 Further Reading 12 File Systems 12.1 Why a File System? 12.2 A Simple Read-Only File System 12.3 Inodes and Writable File Systems 12.4 A Virtual File System 12.5 Further Reading 13 System Calls 13.1 Designing System Calls 13.2 Implementing System Calls 13.3 Further Reading 14 Multitasking 14.1 Creating New Processes 14.2 Cooperative Scheduling with Yielding 14.3 Preemptive Scheduling with Interrupts 14.3.1 Programmable Interval Timer 14.3.2 Separate Kernel Stacks for Processes 14.3.3 Difficulties with Preemptive Scheduling 14.4 Further Reading 1 Introduction This text is a practical guide to writing your own x86 operating system. It is designed to give enough help with the technical details while at the same time not reveal too much with samples and code excerpts. We’ve tried to collect parts of the vast (and often excellent) expanse of material and tutorials available, on the web and otherwise, and add our own insights into the problems we encountered and struggled with. This book is not about the theory behind operating systems, or how any specific operating system (OS) works. For OS theory we recommend the book Modern Operating Systems by Andrew Tanenbaum [1] . Lists and details on current operating systems are available on the Internet. The starting chapters are quite detailed and explicit, to quickly get you into coding. Later chapters give more of an outline of what is needed, as more and more of the implementation and design becomes up to the reader, who should now be more familiar with the world of kernel development. At the end of some chapters there are links for further reading, which might be interesting and give a deeper understanding of the topics covered. In chapter 2 and 3 we set up our development environment and boot up our OS kernel in a virtual machine, eventually starting to write code in C. We continue in chapter 4 with writing to the screen and the serial port, and then we dive into segmentation in chapter 5 and interrupts and input in chapter 6 . After this we have a quite functional but bare-bones OS kernel. In chapter 7 we start the road to user mode applications, with virtual memory through paging ( chapter 8 and 9 ), memory allocation ( chapter 10 ), and finally running a user application in chapter 11 . In the last three chapters we discuss the more advanced topics of file systems ( chapter 12 ), system calls ( chapter 13 ), and multitasking ( chapter 14 ). 1.1 About the Book The OS kernel and this book were produced as part of an advanced individual course at the Royal Institute of Technology [2] , Stockholm. The authors had previously taken courses in OS theory, but had only minor practical experience with OS kernel development. In order to get more insight and a deeper understanding of how the theory from the previous OS courses works out in practice, the authors decided to create a new course, which focused on the development of a small OS. Another goal of the course was writing a thorough tutorial on how to develop a small OS basically from scratch, and this short book is the result. The x86 architecture is, and has been for a long time, one of the most common hardware architectures. It was not a difficult choice to use the x86 architecture as the target of the OS, with its large community, extensive reference material and mature emulators. The documentation and information surrounding the details of the hardware we had to work with was not always easy to find or understand, despite (or perhaps due to) the age of the architecture. The OS was developed in about six weeks of full-time work. The implementation was done in many small steps, and after each step the OS was tested manually. By developing in this incremental and iterative way, it was often easier to find any bugs that were introduced, since only a small part of the code had changed since the last known good state of the code. We encourage the reader to work in a similar way. During the six weeks of development, almost every single line of code was written by the authors together (this way of working is also called pair-programming ). It is our belief that we managed to avoid a lot of bugs due to this style of development, but this is hard to prove scientifically. 1.2 The Reader The reader of this book should be comfortable with UNIX/Linux, systems programming, the C language and computer systems in general (such as hexadecimal notation [3] ). This book could be a way to get started learning those things, but it will be more difficult, and developing an operating system is already challenging on its own. Search engines and other tutorials are often helpful if you get stuck. 1.3 Credits, Thanks and Acknowledgements We’d like to thank the OSDev community [4] for their great wiki and helpful members, and James Malloy for his eminent kernel development tutorial [5] . We’d also like to thank our supervisor Torbjörn Granlund for his insightful questions and interesting discussions. Most of the CSS formatting of the book is based on the work by Scott Chacon for the book Pro Git, http://progit.org/ . 1.4 Contributors We are very grateful for the patches that people send us. The following users have all contributed to this book: alexschneider Avidanborisov nirs kedarmhaswade vamanea ansjob 1.5 Changes and Corrections This book is hosted on Github - if you have any suggestions, comments or corrections, just fork the book, write your changes, and send us a pull request. We’ll happily incorporate anything that makes this book better. 1.6 Issues and where to get help If you run into problems while reading the book, please check the issues on Github for help: https://github.com/littleosbook/littleosbook/issues . 1.7 License All content is under the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial Share Alike 3.0 license, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/us/ . The code samples are in the public domain - use them however you want. References to this book are always received with warmth. 2 First Steps Developing an operating system (OS) is no easy task, and the question “How do I even begin to solve this problem?” is likely to come up several times during the course of the project for different problems. This chapter will help you set up your development environment and booting a very small (and primitive) operating system. 2.1 Tools 2.1.1 Quick Setup We (the authors) have used Ubuntu [6] as the operating system for doing OS development, running it both physically and virtually (using the virtual machine VirtualBox [7] ). A quick way to get everything up and running is to use the same setup as we did, since we know that these tools work with the samples provided in this book. Once Ubuntu is installed, either physical or virtual, the following packages should be installed using apt-get : sudo apt-get install build-essential nasm genisoimage bochs bochs-sdl 2.1.2 Programming Languages The operating system will be developed using the C programming language [8] [9] , using GCC [10] . We use C because developing an OS requires a very precise control of the generated code and direct access to memory. Other languages that provide the same features can also be used, but this book will only cover C. The code will make use of one type attribute that is specific for GCC: __attribute__((pac
