---
id: 981
url: https://2earth.github.io/website/20260304.html
title: TR | 2026-03-04
domain: 2earth.github.io
source_date: '2026-04-04'
tags:
- academic-paper
- astronomy
summary: NASA engineers paired human astronauts with digital computers for Apollo
  spacecraft control, recognizing that manually piloting craft traveling at over 11
  km/s required automated guidance systems with magnetic memory storage to maintain
  reliability under extreme conditions. The author explores the evolution of magnetic
  memory technologies—including TROS, core rope memory, magnetic tape, and bubble
  memory—that enabled the Apollo Guidance Computer to store programs and sensor data
  while withstanding vibration, temperature, and radiation in space. This essay documents
  how these now-obsolete magnetic memory technologies represent a crucial but largely
  undocumented chapter in computing history that made human spaceflight possible.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# TR | 2026-03-04

Tom Ruddell pages / about / follow Remembering Magnetic Memories and the Apollo AGC 4th March 2026 Memories, both human and magnetic In the 1960s NASA engineers made a technical decision that would define the relationship between astronaut and spacecraft: when complex decisions, precise coordination and fast reactions were required, how should a spacecraft be controlled? They decided, in anticipation of developments in so many areas of society, that the best results would be achieved with digital execution subject to human oversight; the human brain would be paired with an artificial memory comprised of wires and magnets. The evolution of digital computing in the middle of the 20th century placed challenging demands on memory technologies. Engineers required ever-more memory at a lower cost, faster access speed, higher density and with greater reliability than previous technologies. This provided the conditions for a creative period of iterative invention and development of magnetic memory technologies which slowed only when semiconductor-based memories came to dominate from the 1970s. It's these magnetic memories that I decided to explore, understand (at least superficially) and illustrate. Above: A collage of my illustrations of 5 magnetic memory technologies . Click to open full-size. Computers in spaceflight In 1962, President John F. Kennedy famously committed NASA’s Apollo mission to landing a man on the moon before 1970. As NASA engineers scrambled to turn this objective into an achievable technical program, they came to understand the complexity of the task. Spacecraft would exceed the speed of sound, entering a new aerodynamic paradigm – and that before exiting the Earth’s atmosphere entirely and travelling by gravitational influences and thrust reaction alone. Astronauts could simply not react fast enough or in such abstract terms to control a craft travelling over 11 km/s and accurately and fuel-efficiently reach a target 384,000 km away. Flying such a craft, they reasoned, would be more akin to extremely rapid control-feedback and solving complex equations than piloting a conventional plane. Even the lunar landing, a short period of manual control, was in fact mediated by the guidance computer, which operated feedback loops between the pilot’s controls, sensors and the craft’s actuators. Assigning these tasks to the guidance computer led to the development of a specification; the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) needed to be able to make observations about the spacecraft’s state (e.g. velocity, position) at a suitable rate and then apply known information and calculations to decide which actions should be made to keep the craft on course. Above: Interior of Apollo spacecraft. The 'DSKY' (pronounced diss-key ) or display and keyboard was the main user interface for the apollo AGC and is located above the astronaut's left hand. To execute a command the astronaut entered a 'verb' using a 2-digit code, followed by a 'noun' (also 2-digits). Click to open full-size. The AGC therefore needed to store the data and programs required to complete mathematical calculations and to interface with sensors, actuators and the user interface. Executing a program thus required read-only memory (ROM) to be loaded and commands to be executed using sensor data – which had to be held in temporary random-access “erasable” memory. What made the AGC’s memory cores so specialised was not so much the quantity of data it stored or the calculations it would run but the constraints that applied to it. The memory needed to operate reliably while withstanding vibration, temperature and radiation, all while being as physically small and lightweight as possible. Remembering Magnetic Memory As I set myself the task to research and understand each technology a great amount of confusion set in. Many of these technologies are well known, but rarely explored in much technical depth. Good quality archival materials are hard to find online – I wanted images of examples, diagrams and technical details of components, dates of production or development and meta-information like materials, developmental history and performance characteristics. While I’m sure each of these technologies features prominently in archives, private and public collections and museums, it seems like an approachable account of magnetic memory development is surprisingly hard to find. So, I sought to humbly contribute, at least far enough to satisfy for my own interest. Above: Detail from the cover of the 1984 Intel Memory Components Handbook . Click to open full-size. But first, a note on memory itself, and an introduction to the parameters that help engineers categorise and describe memory technologies. Memories can be read/write or read-only. Read/write (or “erasable” in NASA terminology) memories are those which permit data to be changed/re-written as part of normal use. Read-only memory (ROM) cannot be easily changed. Memories can be sequential or random access. If data has to be read in address sequence the data is sequential, otherwise if data can be read regardless of where in the memory it is stored the technology allows random access. As we will see, many memories can be read from a random address, with additional latency, despite being stored sequentially. Memory can be volatile or non-volatile. Volatile memory is lost when the system loses power, non-voltage memory is retained on power-off. As far as I’m aware, all magnetic memory technologies are non-volatile, so we don’t need to worry about that. Memory can feature a destructive-read, where data is removed from memory when read and must be re-written if still of use. I don’t know if this is a property that would ever be desired or is just a technological side-effect, give that there is a technical cost attached to additional re-writing operations. In terms of other factors, the 1984 Intel Memory Components Handbook summarises an engineer's requirements as access time, cost, memory size, power consumption and environmental considerations. Together with the memory category and engineer sought, he or she could make an appropriate selection if they knew the order of priority for each factor. Links to each memory: Introduction: Memory, both human and magnetic TROS (Transformer Read Only Storage) Core rope memory Magnetic core memory Magnetic tape memory Bubble memory Conclusions: Remembering obsolete memories < back to index TROS (Transformer Read Only Storage) Esoteric rating: hobby project Complexity: punch-cards on PCBs Read-only Random access When was it developed, and by who? First developed by T. L. Dimond in 1945, Bell Laboratories. Used by IBM in their early mainframe computers. It surely complemented IBM’s punch-card computing machines by retaining a similar programming workflow. Above: An illustration of TROS memory . Click to open full-size. How does it work? A single conductor encodes a word by passing inside or outside numerous ferrites (the number of ferrites determining the word length), each with a sensing coil looped around to form a transformer. When a particular conductor (corresponding to a specific memory address) is energised an output current is induced on each ferrite that the conductor passes through, signifying a “1” bit. Ferrites that the conductor passes outside of do not have a current induced and thus signify a “0” bit. In IBM’s implementation for the System/360 mainframe computer the ferrites are rectilinear “U” shapes and arranged in pairs in two rows, with a bar fixed on top to complete the flux loop. This allows the ferrites to be conveniently opened. Above: Transformer matrix ROM (TROS), from the IBM System/360 Model 40 . Click to open full-size. By RTC, CC BY-SA 3.0, Wikimedia Data was encoded on mylar (a trade-name of PET, a useful electrical insulator that would have been fairly novel at the time, being patented in 1948 ). The mylar sheets had 2 copper tracks which passed both inside and outside rectangular cutouts for the 2 rows of ferrites. The sheets could be punched on one of the 2 tracks to encode a 1 or 0 as described above. There were 60 ferrites (i.e. each word was 60 bits) and each sheet had 2 conductors running inside or outside each, meaning 120 bits per sheet. The mylar sheets were then slotted around the ferrites and stacked above each other and the ferrites were closed with bars at the top (which featured the electrical windings for reading the bits. The conductors on each Mylar sheet were terminated to allow connection for addressing. Benefits? Fairly easy to re-program, involving opening the assembly and replacing Mylar sheets. IBM certainly had experience with punch-card programming and because this method could be employed to encode data onto the mylar sheets it must have been easier for programmers of the computers to use. Drawbacks? Very bulky and allegedly slower than other technologies. The bulk may not have been an issue for IBM’s early mainframes but would have precluded its use as memory requirements grew and computers shrunk. Speeds was another limitation. References Wikipedia , Ken Shirrif's blog < back to index Core Rope Esoteric rating: Space enthusiasts remember Complexity: Rocket science / Expert level electro-knitting Read only Random access When was it developed, and by who? I’m not sure. Wikipedia alleges it was used in the UNIVAC I in the early 1950s, but the description of memory even in the UNIVAC II seems to match magnetic core memory, not core rope memory. It is certain that the MIT’s Instrumentation Lab (IL) made use of core rope in the Apollo Guidance Computer (AGC) in the early 1960s. Above: An illustration of core rope memory . Click to open full-size. How does it work? There are a large number of larger-diameter magnetic cores – one per word. These cores must have a high magnetic permeability and have highly rectangular electro-magnetic induction characteristics; an example material being tapewound Molybdenum permalloy. What this m
