---
id: 96
url: https://davidbessis.substack.com/p/twins-reared-apart-do-not-exist
title: Twins reared apart do not exist - David Bessis
domain: davidbessis.substack.com
source_date: '2025-12-14'
tags:
- academic-paper
- nonfiction-book
summary: David Bessis argues that the famous "twins reared apart" studies used to
  support genetic determinism are fundamentally flawed and misrepresented. He challenges
  Paul Graham's viral claim that identical twins raised separately show nearly identical
  IQ differences, contending this pseudoscientific data oversimplifies the concept
  of heritability and misrepresents what it actually means for individual lives. Bessis
  emphasizes that even with significant heritability figures, environmental factors
  remain crucial, and heritability only becomes practically deterministic at extremely
  high levels—debunking the oversimplified hereditarian narrative presented by popular
  figures.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Twins reared apart do not exist - David Bessis

Twins reared apart do not exist The shaky science of genetic determinism David Bessis Dec 05, 2025 408 107 59 Share This story began two years ago, during the pre-launch of my book on the cognitive techniques of mathematicians . As authors do in those circumstances, I sent a handful of copies to selected high-profile people, in the hope that it would spark the public conversation. I had a fantastic success rate with mathematicians. I sent a copy to Pierre Deligne , who wrote back saying he loved the book, “especially the insistence that learning or doing math is about changing one’s brain.” I sent a copy to Terry Tao , who blurbed the book. It was harder to get my foot in Steve Strogatz ’s door, as he initially declined to even receive the book. But I insisted and, after a few days, he sent back a warm thank you note. He then blurbed the book and posted a big shout-out on the launch day . Outside of academia, the pattern was quite different. Most people never responded. One exception was Paul Graham , who kindly replied to my two-liner cold email. I knew it was a long shot, but I couldn’t not try. First, because I admire him and enjoy his writing on software and startups—and even more so his writing on writing itself and its transformative powers , which is remarkably aligned with central ideas from my book ( and this essay .) This made me feel a genuine intellectual kinship. Second, because I noticed that he was regularly posting on mathematics. It all clicked into place when I found out that his father was a mathematician —the alignment was no coincidence. This made me excited and confident that he would love the book. But, unfortunately, I never heard from him again. Let it be clear that I view this as completely normal. He is a busy person with a million competing interests and, no doubt, a massive reading backlog. Put simply, he owes me nothing. But this was still frustrating as I had a third, more important reason for sending him the book: I wanted to engage with his thinking on a topic where I fundamentally disagree with him—genetic determinism. Hereditarian statements are quite common in Paul Graham’s essays, though most of them are casual remarks that are peripheral to the core message. A good example is this passage from his otherwise great post on determination : A good deal of willfulness must be inborn, because it’s common to see families where one sibling has much more of it than another. Circumstances can alter it, but at the high end of the scale, nature seems to be more important than nurture. There isn’t much to object here, as he is using the appropriate amount of hedging (“must be”, “seems”). But the passage does reveal a strong hereditarian prior. I brushed this one off as an “accident”, and filed it under the category of “unexamined hereditarianism”. The logical gap in the argument was so blatant that it was clear to me that he hadn’t put much thought into it. Indeed, it is not because a trait is striking, precocious, hard to nurture, and unexplained by the social context that it is necessarily innate . This kind of hereditarianism was highly prevalent in the pre-genetics era and I’ve learnt not to take it at face value. A famous example is Henri Poincaré ’s quip that “Mathematicians are born, not made”, which always struck me as being equally rigorous to Brillat-Savarin ’s earlier quip that “One becomes a cook, but one is born a roaster.” My fundamental disagreement isn’t about that—it’s about his sharing on X of pseudoscientific content produced by hereditarian blogger Cremieux, offering him a massive platform. This is where this story starts for good—two years ago, I stumbled upon this powerful tweet by Paul Graham and almost fell off my chair: According to this data assembled by @cremieuxrecueil, the difference in IQ between identical twins reared separately is only half a point greater than the difference between two tests of the same person. This wasn’t a casual remark. This was hardcore genetic determinism, coming from a respected public figure, and backed by a striking visual that cited five independent scientific studies. This tweet was viewed 3.5 million times. I can’t speak for the other 3,499,999, but I found it disturbingly persuasive. The takeaway, it seemed, was pretty simple: when you separate two identical twins at birth, raise them in two random families, and test their IQs in adulthood, the two results are barely more divergent than two different tests of the same person. Fifty shades of correlations I was genuinely shocked. My “centrist” views on heredity and intelligence—that genes matter but are only one factor—were being challenged by clear-cut empirical evidence. So were my views on mathematics, the core ideas in my book, and my own understanding of my life journey. To explain why this visual was so destructive to my worldview, I need to get into the technicalities and, more specifically, into the notion of heritability , a statistical measure of how much genetics influence a given trait. While heritability is an imperfect notion—with nasty caveats that are beyond the scope of this post—it has become a de facto standard and, for better or worse, the complex debate on cognitive inequality is often reframed as a one-dimensional debate on the heritability of IQ. A pure blank-slatist would put it at 0%. A pure hereditarian would put it at 100%. Any reasonable person would put it somewhere in the middle, leaving two questions unresolved: where exactly? , and, what does the figure even mean? The three simulations below illustrate three potential values for the heritability of IQ, 30%, 50%, and 80%. In each case, the dots represent 1000 random people, each placed according to their genetic potential for IQ (horizontal axis) and actual IQs (vertical axis). Heritability measures how close the dots are to fitting on a line. Mathematically, it is defined as the R^2 of the linear regression. At 30%, one does observe a faint correlation between genetic potential and IQ. The correlation becomes clearer at 50%, while remaining quite noisy. This is an essential aspect to keep in mind: 50% may sound like a solid heritability figure, but the associated correlation is rather modest . It’s only at 80% that the picture starts to “feel like” a line. Heritability is, by construction, a population-level aggregate. Before it can inform policy-making (or even personal decision-making), it must be interpreted at the level of individuals. This is where things get interesting and counterintuitive. Let’s say, for example, that you are a genetically average person. How much does that affect your prospects? Surprisingly, at 30%, it’s as if your genes didn’t matter at all. With an average potential, you still have a decent chance of landing at the top or bottom of the IQ distribution. Actually, in this specific random sample, one of three smartest people around (the top 0.3%) happens to have an almost exactly average genetic make-up, and the fourth dumbest person has a slightly above-average potential. At 50%, being genetically average starts to limit your optionality, but the spread remains massive. Had you been marginally luckier—say, in the top third for genetic potential—you’d still have a shot at becoming one of the smartest people around. At 80%, though, your optionality has mostly vanished. It’s still possible to move a notch upward or downward, but the game is mostly over. In this world, geniuses are born, not made. This discussion is generally omitted by hereditarians, which is unfortunate, because it is the only way to clarify the stakes. There is a fundamental asymmetry in the debate. Heritability matters a lot when it is extremely high, because it then supports genetic determinism, but for the rest of the range the exact figure has little practical significance. 1 This is why “heritability centrists” rarely pay attention to the active research in behavioral genetics. Whether the heritability of IQ ends up being 15%, 30%, or 50%, this is “interesting” but not “Earth-shattering”. Of course, if the true figure is 80%, then it’s an entirely different story. Speaking as a mathematician and author of a book on mathematical cognition, I should add two important remarks. First, while social media thrives on memes about mathematical genius and the “IQ red pill”, mathematicians themselves aren’t that interested in IQ. This might be because they understand how the concept is defined. By design, IQ is a statistical construct that captures some common denominator, the “ g factor”, among a variety of cognitive tasks. It’s as if someone had pooled a large number of biomarkers to extract a general health score, the “ h factor”. That doesn’t mean the construct is useless. The concept of good health is a meaningful one and simplistic proxies like “biological age” do make sense in particular contexts. IQ was designed as a cheap, scalable way of identifying students with learning disabilities and, for this specific use case, it is reasonably pragmatic. Do note that the “ g factor” is an abstraction that is impossible to directly measure. All you can get is a proxy that has some degree of correlation (say, 80%) with the actual thing you care about. Given that meaningful real-life cognitive abilities such as “mathematical talent” (whatever the expression means) are themselves only correlated with the “ g factor”, you end up with a complex chain of more-or-less tight correlations that, as a whole, has no credible reason to be tight. That is, unless the “ g factor” captures a fundamental biological reality, in the same sense a CPU has hardware-defined characteristics like clock speed or L1 cache. This is where the asymmetry becomes abysmal: If the heritability of IQ is 50%, then I’d expect the correlation chain to be loose, and I wouldn’t be surprised if the heritability of math talent ended up around 20% or 30%. By contrast, if the heritability of IQ is 80%, then I would eat my hat and concede that mathemat
