---
id: 480
url: https://www.w3.org/TR/wasm-core-2/
title: WebAssembly Core Specification
domain: www.w3.org
source_date: '2025-05-09'
tags:
- compilers
- academic-paper
- security
summary: WebAssembly 2.0 is a safe, portable, low-level code format designed for high-performance
  execution on the Web and in other environments, with a core focus on fast, memory-safe
  execution through a compact binary format and sandbox architecture. The specification
  defines the core instruction set, binary encoding, validation semantics, and virtual
  ISA layer, while security and environment interactions are delegated to embedder-specific
  API definitions. WebAssembly's design emphasizes four basic numeric types, a stack-based
  computational model with structured control flow, and modular components like functions,
  tables, and linear memory to enable efficient, parallelizable decoding and compilation.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# WebAssembly Core Specification

1. Introduction 1.1. Introduction WebAssembly (abbreviated Wasm [ 1 ] ) is a safe, portable, low-level code format designed for efficient execution and compact representation. Its main goal is to enable high performance applications on the Web, but it does not make any Web-specific assumptions or provide Web-specific features, so it can be employed in other environments as well. WebAssembly is an open standard developed by a W3C Community Group . This document describes version 2.0 (Draft 2025-06-16) of the core WebAssembly standard. It is intended that it will be superseded by new incremental releases with additional features in the future. 1.1.1. Design Goals The design goals of WebAssembly are the following: Fast, safe, and portable semantics : Fast : executes with near native code performance, taking advantage of capabilities common to all contemporary hardware. Safe : code is validated and executes in a memory-safe [ 2 ] , sandboxed environment preventing data corruption or security breaches. Well-defined : fully and precisely defines valid programs and their behavior in a way that is easy to reason about informally and formally. Hardware-independent : can be compiled on all modern architectures, desktop or mobile devices and embedded systems alike. Language-independent : does not privilege any particular language, programming model, or object model. Platform-independent : can be embedded in browsers, run as a stand-alone VM, or integrated in other environments. Open : programs can interoperate with their environment in a simple and universal manner. Efficient and portable representation : Compact : has a binary format that is fast to transmit by being smaller than typical text or native code formats. Modular : programs can be split up in smaller parts that can be transmitted, cached, and consumed separately. Efficient : can be decoded, validated, and compiled in a fast single pass, equally with either just-in-time (JIT) or ahead-of-time (AOT) compilation. Streamable : allows decoding, validation, and compilation to begin as soon as possible, before all data has been seen. Parallelizable : allows decoding, validation, and compilation to be split into many independent parallel tasks. Portable : makes no architectural assumptions that are not broadly supported across modern hardware. WebAssembly code is also intended to be easy to inspect and debug, especially in environments like web browsers, but such features are beyond the scope of this specification. 1.1.2. Scope At its core, WebAssembly is a virtual instruction set architecture (virtual ISA) . As such, it has many use cases and can be embedded in many different environments. To encompass their variety and enable maximum reuse, the WebAssembly specification is split and layered into several documents. This document is concerned with the core ISA layer of WebAssembly. It defines the instruction set, binary encoding, validation, and execution semantics, as well as a textual representation. It does not, however, define how WebAssembly programs can interact with a specific environment they execute in, nor how they are invoked from such an environment. Instead, this specification is complemented by additional documents defining interfaces to specific embedding environments such as the Web. These will each define a WebAssembly application programming interface (API) suitable for a given environment. 1.1.3. Security Considerations WebAssembly provides no ambient access to the computing environment in which code is executed. Any interaction with the environment, such as I/O, access to resources, or operating system calls, can only be performed by invoking functions provided by the embedder and imported into a WebAssembly module . An embedder can establish security policies suitable for a respective environment by controlling or limiting which functional capabilities it makes available for import. Such considerations are an embedder’s responsibility and the subject of API definitions for a specific environment. Because WebAssembly is designed to be translated into machine code running directly on the host’s hardware, it is potentially vulnerable to side channel attacks on the hardware level. In environments where this is a concern, an embedder may have to put suitable mitigations into place to isolate WebAssembly computations. 1.1.4. Dependencies WebAssembly depends on two existing standards: [IEEE-754-2019] , for the representation of floating-point data and the semantics of respective numeric operations . [UNICODE] , for the representation of import/export names and the text format . However, to make this specification self-contained, relevant aspects of the aforementioned standards are defined and formalized as part of this specification, such as the binary representation and rounding of floating-point values, and the value range and UTF-8 encoding of Unicode characters. Note The aforementioned standards are the authoritative source of all respective definitions. Formalizations given in this specification are intended to match these definitions. Any discrepancy in the syntax or semantics described is to be considered an error. 1.2. Overview 1.2.1. Concepts WebAssembly encodes a low-level, assembly-like programming language. This language is structured around the following concepts. Values WebAssembly provides only four basic number types . These are integers and [IEEE-754-2019] numbers, each in 32 and 64 bit width. 32 bit integers also serve as Booleans and as memory addresses. The usual operations on these types are available, including the full matrix of conversions between them. There is no distinction between signed and unsigned integer types. Instead, integers are interpreted by respective operations as either unsigned or signed in two’s complement representation. In addition to these basic number types, there is a single 128 bit wide vector type representing different types of packed data. The supported representations are 4 32-bit, or 2 64-bit [IEEE-754-2019] numbers, or different widths of packed integer values, specifically 2 64-bit integers, 4 32-bit integers, 8 16-bit integers, or 16 8-bit integers. Finally, values can consist of opaque references that represent pointers towards different sorts of entities. Unlike with other types, their size or representation is not observable. Instructions The computational model of WebAssembly is based on a stack machine . Code consists of sequences of instructions that are executed in order. Instructions manipulate values on an implicit operand stack [ 1 ] and fall into two main categories. Simple instructions perform basic operations on data. They pop arguments from the operand stack and push results back to it. Control instructions alter control flow. Control flow is structured , meaning it is expressed with well-nested constructs such as blocks, loops, and conditionals. Branches can only target such constructs. Traps Under some conditions, certain instructions may produce a trap , which immediately aborts execution. Traps cannot be handled by WebAssembly code, but are reported to the outside environment, where they typically can be caught. Functions Code is organized into separate functions . Each function takes a sequence of values as parameters and returns a sequence of values as results. Functions can call each other, including recursively, resulting in an implicit call stack that cannot be accessed directly. Functions may also declare mutable local variables that are usable as virtual registers. Tables A table is an array of opaque values of a particular element type . It allows programs to select such values indirectly through a dynamic index operand. Currently, the only available element type is an untyped function reference or a reference to an external host value. Thereby, a program can call functions indirectly through a dynamic index into a table. For example, this allows emulating function pointers by way of table indices. Linear Memory A linear memory is a contiguous, mutable array of raw bytes. Such a memory is created with an initial size but can be grown dynamically. A program can load and store values from/to a linear memory at any byte address (including unaligned). Integer loads and stores can specify a storage size which is smaller than the size of the respective value type. A trap occurs if an access is not within the bounds of the current memory size. Modules A WebAssembly binary takes the form of a module that contains definitions for functions, tables, and linear memories, as well as mutable or immutable global variables . Definitions can also be imported , specifying a module/name pair and a suitable type. Each definition can optionally be exported under one or more names. In addition to definitions, modules can define initialization data for their memories or tables that takes the form of segments copied to given offsets. They can also define a start function that is automatically executed. Embedder A WebAssembly implementation will typically be embedded into a host environment. This environment defines how loading of modules is initiated, how imports are provided (including host-side definitions), and how exports can be accessed. However, the details of any particular embedding are beyond the scope of this specification, and will instead be provided by complementary, environment-specific API definitions. 1.2.2. Semantic Phases Conceptually, the semantics of WebAssembly is divided into three phases. For each part of the language, the specification specifies each of them. Decoding WebAssembly modules are distributed in a binary format . Decoding processes that format and converts it into an internal representation of a module. In this specification, this representation is modelled by abstract syntax , but a real implementation could compile directly to machine code instead. Validation A decoded module has to be valid . Validation checks a number of well-formedness conditions to guar
