---
id: 106
url: https://pqnelson.github.io/2024/05/29/literate-programming.html
title: What even is "literate programming"?
domain: pqnelson.github.io
source_date: '2025-12-07'
tags:
- tutorial
- compilers
- academic-paper
summary: Literate programming, as originally envisioned by Donald Knuth, is a method
  of writing code that emphasizes top-down exposition and design discussion without
  being rigidly tied to structured programming's rules. Rather than forcing each design
  component into a separate subroutine, Knuth wanted programmers to decompose code
  chunks and explain their relationships while maintaining flexibility in implementation
  approach. The practical process involves writing problem statements, outlining program
  structure using named code chunks as pseudocode, rearranging chunks for reader comprehension,
  and only then writing the actual code—with Bob Nystrom's *Crafting Interpreters*
  cited as a successful modern example of this approach.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# What even is "literate programming"?

What even is "literate programming"? by Alex Nelson, 29 May 2024 There are more hot takes on “literate programming” than I’d care to enumerate, so I’d like to focus on trying to figure out what Donald Knuth means by the term “literate programming”. What is it? When is it useful? How do I do “literate programming”? I try to answer these questions with what I’ve learned about “literate programming” (in Knuth’s sense) over the past few years. Knuth’s Original Intent? I contend that Knuth originally intended literate programming to be used for top-down discussions, combined with programming willy-nilly (top-down, bottom-up, or any other orientation one desires). It’s important to bear in mind the context when Knuth came up with this approach (around 1974, according to a dated letter Knuth sent de Marneffe). Structured programming has become accepted as “the” way to program, which brought with it top-down design as “the” way to approach a problem. But enough time has passed since the publication of Structured Programming by Dijkstra, Hoare, and friends, to have accumulated experience with its shortcomings. The appeal of top-down programming speaks for itself: we understand things by analyzing them into components and how these components relate to each other. But doing this in practice…well, in the 1970s, this led to needless ritual and some code bloat thanks to the cookie-cutter template Harlan Mills turned it into. Mills argued the top-down design was a corollary to structured programming, so we were all forced to live with it as Mills described top-down design : carve up a program into subprograms which were implemented as subroutines. Then iterate this step until you’ve got a functioning program. I think that Knuth wanted to retain certain elements of top-down programming, namely the ability to decompose a “chunk” of code into constituents and discuss the relationship between them. But without being tied to introducing a subroutine for each constituent of a decomposition, whether it made sense or not (as was the fad of 1970s cargo-cult structured programming). What leads me to think along this line of reasoning is that Knuth states in the WEB manual that, among the influences for literate programming, (3) The top-down style of exposition encouraged by WEB was of course chiefly influenced by Edsger Dijkstra’s essays on structured programming in the late 1960s. The less well known work of Pierre-Arnoul de Marneffe [“Holon programming: A survey,” Univ. de Liege, Service Informatique, Liege, Belgium, 1973; 135 pp., eprint ] also had a significant influence on the author as WEB was being formulated. (4) Edwin Towster has proposed a similar style of documentation in which the programmer is supposed to specify the relevant data structure environment in the name of each submodule [“A convention for explicit declaration of environments and top-down refinement of data,” IEEE Trans. on Software Eng. SE–5 (1979), 374–386, doi:10.1109/TSE.1979.234205 ]; this requirement seems to make the documentation a bit too verbose, although experience with WEB has shown that any unusual control structure or data structure should definitely be incorporated into the module names on psychological grounds. (Note: I have added link to Marneffe’s paper and DOI link to Towster’s paper for ease of reference.) **Addendum** Feb 11, 2025 (8:32:58 AM) . After reading Marneffe's thesis, it appears that he took a rather fascinating approach. If you think of a literate program as a tree (with the code chunks as nodes), then only in the "leaf" chunks can there be assignment operations. The "node" chunks describe the control flow (if-statements, loops, etc.). But no assignment may occur in a "node". Of course, Marneffe was trying to build a language atop any given programming language to facilitate structured programming. This reveals more than it may seem: Literate programming focuses on top-down exposition (whatever that means); Looking at Towster’s article, it’s clear he organizes a program using chunking , even calling the sections/nodes “chunks” which forms a tree-like structure, which has code as its terminal nodes. The relevant part of Towster’s paper seems to be from the second page: Every node of the tree is a “chunk” with a “chunk name” that stands for the declarations at the terminal nodes of its subtree. The programmer need not conceive of the terminal nodes before coding begins, only the topmost nodes of the tree, as needed to functionally describe the data in the topmost modules of the program. Additional nodes are created and attached to the tree as programming proceeds, with descendant nodes representing the data used in implementing the data structure described by their ancestor nodes. The tree is thus developed top-downwards (from root to terminal nodes) as the program is being written. This is all well and fine, but how does someone actually write a literate program? Knuth doesn’t say, and the closest I could find is in Wayne Sewell’s book Weaving a Program: Literate Programming in Web (1989) which Knuth wrote a foreward for (and so, I guess, endorsed the strategies Sewell suggests). Chapter 3 of Sewell’s book gives us explicitly a “how to” tutorial in section 1: First write the problem statement as the first chunk. Then outline the “skeleton” of the program in the second section using named code chunks as pseudocode to be filled in later. Then do a sort of quick sketch adding more named chunks of code, outlining the design further in commentary, and each quick sketch is then recursively outlined using named chunks of code as a sort of pseudocode outline of ideas. Importantly, all the while, you are delaying the “write actual code” work as much as possible. The idea is that you are trying to get the design working, the problem fleshed out, and using the named code chunks for pseudocode. Rearrange the chunks into an order that makes sense for your reader. You have this freedom because WEB and CWEB are “order independent”, so think hard about what makes sense for the reader to readily absorb your program and its structure. Then weave it into a PDF, look at it, make sure it makes sense and the program does what you want. Then write the code. If this is accurate to how Knuth envisions literate programming, then I never would have guessed it in a million years. Examples of Literate Programming Knuth gives us examples of literate programming, but I want to look at examples from other people. David R. Hanson’s C Interfaces and Implementations: Techniques for Creating Reusable Software (Addison-Wesley Professional, 1996) is often cited as one, but it is rather stale as a literate program. The named code chunks are unimaginative boiler-plate names, like “<Include files for foo.c >” or <my_module.h> . David R. Hanson and Christopher Fraser’s Retargetable C Compiler, A: Design and Implementation (Addison-Wesley Professional, 1995) is another example cited as a literate program, but it is a post hoc literate program: the C compiler was written first, and years later this commentary was built around it. I would argue the only example of a successful literate program is Bob Nystrom’s Crafting Interpreters , and I’m not sure that Nystrom was even aware of the notion of “literate programming” when he wrote his book. He wrote a blog post Crafting Crafting Interpreters about his experience and approach. In particular, what jumps out at me is the observation: After a few months, it was all there. Every single line of code for the entire book. A complete list of chapters. And I hadn’t written a single word of prose. In theory, “all” that remained was writing some text to explain the code I had already written along with some pictures. But, for me at least, English is a much more taxing language to write than C or Java. I had all of the difficult work ahead of me, and all of the fun was done. In other words, Bob Nystrom wrote the code and the list of chapters, revised the code quite heavily, made sure the “chapter dependencies” were linear, all before writing any prose. This is in direct conflict with the advice given by Meyers’s book. I was really curious about specific advice Nystrom had to offer about literate programming, so I emailed him for any wisdom he could share with me. The recommendations: Have simple code, because the more complicated the code, the more complicated the explanations. Avoid large-scale cyclic dependencies, minimize “forward declarations” of concepts. I took this to mean that ideally in chapter N , you should rely on everything from previous chapters and nothing from future chapters. In particular, this means you should build your program using bottom-up coding. Explain things top/down at the chapter or section level. If you code bottom-up, readers don’t understand why you’re doing it. This requires explaining to them the big picture, which motivates the code. Edit, edit, edit. Both the code and the prose, you can never edit too much. Again, I never would have guessed this in a million years if I just read Donald Knuth’s articles alone. When do you want “literate programming”? Tl;dr: if you want to preserve knowledge, then literate programming is a good fit. (There may be other cases when literate programming is a good fit, but this is the one use-case where it definitely works well.) The times when I have done something like literate programming boil down to instances like numerical analysis, where I have some derivation of the algorithm from mathematics, and that doesn’t fit well as a comment. I also don’t want to throw away the derivation (“future me” may forget how it was done). Bob Nystrom’s book is literally about preserving his knowledge about, well, crafting interpreters. Even the books I cited by Hanson are about preserving knowledge, either about a particular C compiler, or about particular programming practices in C. Arguably, Knuth’s use of WEB for TeX and Metafont was to preserve knowledge about the intended algor
