---
id: 20
url: https://emnudge.dev/blog/what-happened-to-webassembly/
title: What Happened To WebAssembly
domain: emnudge.dev
source_date: '2026-01-09'
tags:
- compilers
- web-dev
- security
summary: WebAssembly (Wasm) hasn't disappeared—it's actively used in real-world applications
  like Figma, Godot, and Squoosh—but it hasn't become the universal web development
  standard some predicted. The article clarifies that Wasm is fundamentally a low-level
  compilation target (similar to bytecode) rather than a replacement for JavaScript,
  excelling in specific use cases like running untrusted code securely, embedding
  computationally intensive libraries, and enabling cross-language portability. Its
  real strength lies in its strong security guarantees and efficient isolation capabilities,
  which enable applications like Cloudflare's code sandboxing and Figma's plugin system,
  rather than replacing traditional web frameworks.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# What Happened To WebAssembly

Table Of Contents In The Real World What Is WebAssembly A Note On Speed An Efficient Mapping A compilation target Security and what it enables Portability and Embeddability Speed and size revisited Language development and you Footnotes On every WebAssembly discussion, there is inevitably one comment (often near the top) asking what happened. It seems to have been advertised as a world-changing advancement. Was it just oversold? Was it another JVM applet scenario, doomed to fail? I’d like to tackle this in a weirdly roundabout way because I think these sorts of questions make a few misplaced assumptions that are critical to clarify. # In The Real World Of course, WebAssembly does see real-world usage. Let’s list some examples! Godot uses WebAssembly to build games for the web . Squoosh.app uses WebAssembly to make use of image libraries . Zellij uses WebAssembly for its plugin ecosystem . Figma uses WebAssembly to convert their C++ code to something usable in a browser Stackblitz uses WebAssembly for their web containers . Ruffle uses WebAssembly to run a flash emulator in your browser For many of these, WebAssembly is critical to either their entire product or a major feature. But I think this alone is not very convincing. We don’t yet see major websites entirely built with webassembly-based frameworks . We’re not building our applications directly to WebAssembly for maximum portability. But why not? To answer this, we need a good mental model for what WebAssembly is. This will help us qualify where it is most impactful and the limitations we’re up against. # What Is WebAssembly In a word, WebAssembly is a language. # A Note On Speed This makes questions like “how fast is WebAssembly” a bit hard to answer. You don’t ask how fast algebraic notation is—it’s not a very sensible question. Taken in the context of something like JavaScript, the language is only as fast as the engine running it. JavaScript the language has no speed, but you can benchmark JS engines like V8, SpiderMonkey, and JavaScriptCore. You can benchmark the IO libraries of JS runtimes like Bun, Deno, and Node. What people actually mean is “how useful are the constructs of this language to efficient mappings of modern hardware” and “what is the current landscape of systems taking advantage of these constructs”. Through clever-enough engineering, you can make any system sufficiently fast with some trade-offs. If compiling your code directly to C doesn’t bother you, getting “near native” speeds is possible in both JavaScript and WebAssembly . That’s right, you can compile WebAssembly! You can also choose to interpret it directly—that’ll be up to your runtime, just like every other system. So let’s ask the actual question of WebAssembly: how useful are the constructs of this language to efficient mappings of modern hardware? Turns out, pretty useful! # An Efficient Mapping WebAssembly is a pretty close approximation of an assembly language. Not too close, mind you. It’s higher level than that. But it’s close enough to cleanly compile to most assembly languages without a significant speed trade-off. And yes, you can write WebAssembly by hand! I made a rustlings-esque course called watlings where you can hand-write WAT to solve some basic exercises. WAT is a very close approximation to Wasm. It is almost 1:1 in that you can compile WAT to Wasm and then back to WAT with barely any loss in information (you may lose variable names and some metadata). It looks like this: ( module ;; import external i32, name it $global_num_import ( import "env" "global_num" ( global $global_num_import i32)) ;; A function that adds param $a to $global_num_import, returns i32 ( func $add_to_global_num ( param $a i32) ( result i32) ;; The last stack value is the return value ( i32.add ( local.get $a) ( global.get $global_num_import)) ) ;; export local function, name it add_to_global ( export "add_to_global" ( func $add_to_global_num)) ) Try reading the code. It will feel both familiar and foreign. We have functions and S-expressions. We have imports and exports. But we also have instructions like i32.add and implicit stack returns. Wasm is a bytecode perhaps best compared to JVMIS (i.e. JVM bytecode). They have similar goals and constraints, but different landscapes and guarantees. Compared to JVM bytecode, Wasm has a significantly smaller API and stronger safety guarantees. It has fewer opinions on your memory management strategy and more limitations on what your program can do without permission from its host environment. It can crunch numbers, but must be explicitly provided its memory and all imports. In this way, it is much different from an actual assembly language (or, a more widely used one). We’ll wrap back around to this later. # A compilation target You can compile many languages to Wasm. Notable among them are Rust, C, Zig, Go, Kotlin, Java, and C#. Commonly interpreted languages have even had their runtimes compiled to WebAssembly, such as Python, PHP, and Ruby. There are also many languages that solely compile to WebAssembly, such as AssemblyScript , Grain , and MoonBit . For many of these, it is important not to require a garbage-collector. For others, it would be helpful to include one. Wasm allows for both (with the GC option being much more recent). 1 Your browser includes a Wasm “engine”, making this doubly an attractive compilation target. This means without much setup, your phone and laptop can run Wasm programs already. Like how JVM can have many implementations of its runner, there are many implementations that run independently of your browser such as Wasmtime , WasmEdge , and Wasmer . Terminal window $ Wasmer run cowsay "I am cow" __________ < I am cow > ---------- \ ^__^ \ (oo) \_ ______ ( __ ) \ ) \/\ || ----w | || || These languages can output a single artifact without being too specific to your computer’s hardware. You only need a Wasm runner to execute it (note more JVM analogies). # Security and what it enables Right now, Wasm is looking really similar to JVM. The main differences seem to be around memory management strategies and how many platforms support it. The security story is what really starts to drive in the wedge. WebAssembly maintains a minimal attack surface by treating all external interactions as explicit, host-defined imports. We went over this earlier. Its “deny-by-default” architecture, small instruction set, hidden control-flow stack (i.e. no raw pointers), and linear memory combine to create a very strong security story. It is such that you can ensure process-like isolation within a single process. Cloudflare takes advantage of this aspect within V8 to run untrusted code very efficiently using V8 isolates . This means significant efficiency gains without significant security trade-offs. Wasm programs can start 100x faster if you can avoid spinning up a separate process. Fermyon, a company in the Wasm hosting space, advertises sub-millisecond spinup times . In these cases, the performance is a direct result of what the security guarantees enable. In other cases, security can unlock feature support. Flash is a multimedia platform that was primarily used for animations and games up until it was dropped from all major browsers in January of 2021 (primarily) due to security concerns. Ruffle has revived Flash experiences on sites like Newgrounds by acting as an interpreter and VM for ActionScript. Cloudflare allows running Python code with similar security guarantees to its JS code by using Pyodide , which is a Wasm build of CPython. Figma runs untrusted user plugins in your browser by running them in a QuickJS engine that is compiled to Wasm . Elsewhere, the security allows for extreme embeddability. # Portability and Embeddability We’ve gone over the number of ways you can run Wasm programs. A Wasm runner can be pretty light. Instead of forcing library authors into a specific language (usually Lua or JavaScript), supporting Wasm itself opens the door to a much wider set of choices. Tools like Zellij , Envoy , and Lapce support Wasm for their plugin ecosystem. In environments where a JavaScript engine is already being used, this means access to programs you would not have been able to run otherwise. This includes image processing , ocr , physics engines , rendering engines , media toolkits , databases , and parsers , among many others. In a majority of these cases, the use of Wasm will be transparent to you. A library you installed will just be using it somewhere in its dependency tree. Godot and Figma have codebases written in C++, but are often browser-ready by compiling to (or in combination with) WebAssembly. It seems the most common use of Wasm is bridging the language gap. Certain ecosystems seem to have suites of tools more common to them. Squoosh would be a much more limited application if it could only choose image compression libraries from NPM. # Speed and size revisited Browsers run WebAssembly with roughly the same pipeline that runs JavaScript. This seemingly puts a hard limit on the performance of Wasm applications, but they will often be more or less performant due to their architecture or domainSystems like WASI allow for some standardization over APIs, but a glue layer doesn’t seem likely to go away. . Using languages with richer type systems and more sophisticated optimizing compilers can produce more efficient programs. The JIT model of engines like V8 might prevent optimizations if the cost of optimizing exceeds the gains from running the optimized code. You might avoid megamorphic functions more easily by avoiding JavaScript. However, there is a cost to crossing the host-program boundary, especially if cloning memory. Zaplib’s post-mortem is an interesting read here. Incrementally moving a codebase to Wasm can incur significant costs in boundary crossing, eliminating any benefit in the short term. A small API surface also means binary bloat as system APIs are more often re-created than imported. There are s
