---
id: 204
url: https://www.gilesthomas.com/2025/10/llm-from-scratch-22-finally-training-our-llm
title: 'Writing an LLM from scratch, part 22 -- finally training our LLM! :: Giles''
  blog'
domain: www.gilesthomas.com
source_date: '2025-10-15'
tags:
- llm
- tutorial
- ai
- python
summary: This blog post documents the culmination of a 22-part series on building
  an LLM from scratch, where the author finally trains their custom language model
  using Sebastian Raschka's book. After training on a small dataset (Edith Wharton's
  "The Verdict"), the model generates coherent text, and when loaded with GPT-2's
  pre-trained weights, it produces remarkably sensible outputs. The author reflects
  on key learning points including the importance of manual seeding for reproducibility
  and provides an introduction to optimization algorithms like AdamW that dynamically
  adjust learning rates during training.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Writing an LLM from scratch, part 22 -- finally training our LLM! :: Giles' blog

Giles' blog About Contact Archives Categories Blogroll January 2026 (2) December 2025 (1) November 2025 (3) October 2025 (9) September 2025 (3) August 2025 (5) July 2025 (1) June 2025 (2) May 2025 (3) April 2025 (2) March 2025 (7) February 2025 (10) January 2025 (6) December 2024 (7) September 2024 (1) August 2024 (2) July 2024 (2) May 2024 (2) April 2024 (2) February 2024 (2) April 2023 (1) March 2023 (2) September 2022 (1) February 2022 (1) November 2021 (1) March 2021 (1) February 2021 (2) August 2019 (1) November 2018 (1) May 2017 (1) December 2016 (1) April 2016 (1) August 2015 (1) December 2014 (1) August 2014 (1) March 2014 (1) December 2013 (1) October 2013 (3) September 2013 (4) August 2013 (2) July 2013 (1) June 2013 (1) February 2013 (1) October 2012 (1) June 2012 (1) May 2012 (1) April 2012 (1) February 2012 (1) October 2011 (1) June 2011 (1) May 2011 (1) April 2011 (1) March 2011 (1) February 2011 (1) January 2011 (1) December 2010 (3) November 2010 (1) October 2010 (1) September 2010 (1) August 2010 (1) July 2010 (1) May 2010 (3) April 2010 (1) March 2010 (2) February 2010 (3) January 2010 (4) December 2009 (2) November 2009 (5) October 2009 (2) September 2009 (2) August 2009 (3) July 2009 (1) May 2009 (1) April 2009 (1) March 2009 (5) February 2009 (5) January 2009 (5) December 2008 (3) November 2008 (7) October 2008 (4) September 2008 (2) August 2008 (1) July 2008 (1) June 2008 (1) May 2008 (1) April 2008 (1) January 2008 (4) December 2007 (3) March 2007 (3) February 2007 (1) January 2007 (2) December 2006 (4) November 2006 (18) AI (64) TIL deep dives (59) Python (58) Resolver One (34) LLM from scratch (31) Blogkeeping (18) PythonAnywhere (17) Linux (16) Startups (15) NSLU2 offsite backup project (13) TIL (13) Funny (11) Finance (10) Fine-tuning LLMs (10) Musings (10) C (9) Gadgets (8) Personal (8) Robotics (8) Website design (8) 3D (5) Rants (5) Cryptography (4) JavaScript (4) Music (4) Oddities (4) Quick links (4) Talks (4) Dirigible (3) Eee (3) Memes (3) Politics (3) Django (2) GPU Computing (2) LaTeX (2) MathML (2) OLPC XO (2) Retro Language Models (2) Space (2) VoIP (2) Copyright (1) Golang (1) Raspberry Pi (1) Software development tools (1) Agile Abstractions Astral Codex Ten :: (Bloggable a) => a -> IO () David Friedman's Substack Econ & Energy Entrepreneurial Geekiness For some value of "Magic" Hackaday kaleidic.ai newsletter Knowing.NET Language Log Millennium Hand ntoll.org Obey the Testing Goat! PK PythonAnywhere News Simon Willison's Weblog Societive Software Deviser Some opinions, held with varying degrees of certainty tartley.com Writing an LLM from scratch, part 22 -- finally training our LLM! Posted on 15 October 2025 in AI , LLM from scratch , TIL deep dives This post wraps up my notes on chapter 5 of Sebastian Raschka 's book " Build a Large Language Model (from Scratch) ". Understanding cross entropy loss and perplexity were the hard bits for me in this chapter -- the remaining 28 pages were more a case of plugging bits together and running the code, to see what happens. The shortness of this post almost feels like a damp squib. After writing so much in the last 22 posts, there's really not all that much to say -- but that hides the fact that this part of the book is probably the most exciting to work through. All these pieces developed with such care, and with so much to learn, over the preceding 140 pages, with not all that much to show -- and suddenly, we have a codebase that we can let rip on a training set -- and our model starts talking to us! I trained my model on the sample dataset that we use in the book, the 20,000 characters of "The Verdict" by Edith Wharton, and then ran it to predict next tokens after "Every effort moves you". I got: Every effort moves you in," was down surprise a was one of lo "I quote. Not bad for a model trained on such a small amount of data (in just over ten seconds). The next step was to download the weights for the original 124M-parameter version of GPT-2 from OpenAI, following the instructions in the book, and then to load them into my model. With those weights, against the same prompt, I got this: Every effort moves you as far as the hand can go until the end of your turn unless something interrupts your control flow. As you may observe I That's amazingly cool. Coherent enough that you could believe it's part of the instructions for a game. Now, I won't go through the remainder of the chapter in detail -- as I said, it's essentially just plugging together the various bits that we've gone through so far, even though the results are brilliant. In this post I'm just going to make a few brief notes on the things that I found interesting. Randomness and seeding One thing I really do recommend to anyone working through the book is that you type in all of the code, and run it yourself -- it really will help you remember how stuff fits together. There is one slight issue I found with that, however: the book has a number of examples where you get output from code that uses randomness -- for example, where you take a look at the loss it has on some sample text before you start training, or make it generate samples during the train. Now, in theory, because Raschka puts torch.manual_seed calls before all of these, the results you get should be exactly the same as the outputs in the book. However, the amount of code we're working with at this stage is quite large -- we have various helper functions that were created in earlier sections, for example. And some of these use randomness. That means that to get the same results as the ones in the book, you would need to ensure that all of the code that uses randomness was running in exactly the same order as it was when Raschka did it for the book. That turns out to be surprisingly hard! My instinct is that it doesn't actually matter all that much. So long as the loss numbers that you see are in the same ballpark as the ones in the book, and the outputs you see are roughly equally incoherent (before training) and become more coherent at what feels like the same kind of rate, you're fine. Probably the most important one to look out for is when the training run starts -- you should see loss on the training set decreasing steadily, just like in the book, and likewise as in the book, the validation loss should plateau out pretty early. Optimisers When I have built simple backpropagation through neural networks in the past, I've generally updated parameters by multiplying the gradients by a small number, the learning rate , and then subtracting them from their respective parameters to get updated ones -- classic stochastic gradient descent . Non-trivial ML uses optimisers; I'd come across them while fine-tuning LLMs , and also used one in the RNN code I wrote last week . Instead of updating the parameters yourself, you ask the optimiser to do it for you, by calling its step function. AdamW appears to be the default optimiser in most textbooks, though Muon seems to be the most popular in use, if my AI X/Twitter feed is to be believed. I don't understand how optimisers work in any detail, and I'm going to have to dig into that in the future. However, my high-level simplified picture right now is that they dynamically adjust the learning rate over time, so that it's easier to take big "jumps" downwards on the gradients when you start, and then smaller ones later. I believe they can also sometimes avoid local minima in the loss landscape -- a nice metaphor I read somewhere (lost the source, sadly) was that simple gradient descent was like rolling a ball down a hill, but (some?) optimisers give the ball a bit of momentum so that it can coast over a small uphill portion, so long as the general slope is downwards. Anyway, more investigation needed later. In practice, with AdamW, you initialise it at the start of your training loop, with a learning rate (which I imagine is similar to the one my older code used, a scaling factor for gradients) and a weight decay (:shrug:). You also provide it with the parameters it's going to be managing. In the training loop, at the start of each input batch, you tell it to zero out the gradients it's managing with optimizer.zero_grad() , run the data through your model and calculate your loss, and then after calling loss.backward() to get your gradients, you just call optimizer.step() , and that does the parameter update. Again, I want to dig into how optimisers work in more detail in the future. But for now, I think that's all I need to know. Speed, and the cost of training The book tells you how to train on a public domain book, "The Verdict" by Edith Wharton. Full training on the hardware that people are likely to have to hand would be extremely expensive, so we just train on that short example, then later on learn how to download and use the weights that OpenAI made available for their GPT-2 models. But there was something that surprised me a little. When talking about the training run on "The Verdict", Raschka says that it takes "about 5 minutes to complete on a MacBook Air". On my machine using CUDA on an RTX 3090, it took just less than eleven seconds. This makes perfect sense, of course -- there's a really good reason why AI training is normally done on GPUs or custom hardware, and the MacBook Air would presumably be training on the CPU. But I was a little surprised at how huge the difference was in this simple example! Now, while the book mentions that Llama 2 probably cost hundreds of thousands of dollars to train, I must admit that I do wonder how much it really would cost to train a 124M parameter model on my own hardware -- or, indeed, on the machines with 8x 80GiB A100 GPUs that I rented from Lambda Labs during my fine-tuning experiments. Andrej Karpathy was able to train a 124M GPT-2 model for $20 , using his hand-written C/CUDA LLM system llm.c . That is undoubtedly more efficient than the PyTorch code that we're working on in this book. But it really would be interes
