---
id: 343
url: https://www.bostonglobe.com/2025/07/09/magazine/19-cheap-eats-20-dollars-or-less/
title: 19 cheap food restaurant choices, tasty and $20 dollars or less
domain: www.bostonglobe.com
source_date: '2025-07-17'
tags:
- recipe
- news
summary: The Boston Globe's guide highlights 19 affordable restaurants across the
  Boston area where you can enjoy quality meals for $20 or less. The article showcases
  diverse cuisines—from Armenian-Lebanese bowls and hand-pulled Chinese noodles to
  Colombian empanadas and Turkish shakshuka—proving that Boston's notoriously expensive
  dining scene still offers plenty of hidden gems for budget-conscious diners. Whether
  seeking bakeries, sandwich shops, or full meals, these restaurants deliver high-value,
  flavorful options throughout the city.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# 19 cheap food restaurant choices, tasty and $20 dollars or less

D ining out in Boston can feel like getting politely mugged (or, occasionally, impolitely mugged). But for a city with a notoriously expensive dining scene, there are a number of lower-cost, high-value delights, from hand-pulled noodles to mouth-scalding cheese pies to flower-laced pupusas — if you know where to look. Here’s a cheapo’s cheat sheet for spots that will leave you stuffed for about $20 or less. (You’ll find some favorites from The Globe’ s 2024 best of cheap eats list in new categories this year: best bakeries and best sandwich shops .) anoush’ella anoush’ella Heath Robbins This Armenian-Lebanese fast-casual spot serves up extraordinary meals in less time than it takes to order an Uber, and often for $10 or less. Try one of the massive bowls, perhaps grilled halloumi or kofta on a bed of toasted couscous — herb-flecked, fluffy, and the size of marbles — piled high with fattoush, pita chips, and dips. The labne bar is a highlight, with various sweet and savory toppings. Scoop up the extra-thick yogurt spread with the restaurant’s signature flatbread, griddled right in front of you. Address: 35 West Newton Street, South End, and other locations Phone: 857-265-3195 Find online: anoushella.com Bova’s Bova’s Erin Clark/Globe staff/File This iconic 24-hour bakery has no end of Italian sweets, but don’t sleep on the savory offerings, including thick Sicilian slices and arancini, gooey in the center and the size of a fist. But the real stars are the half-calzones, $12 (if you order in person) but hefty, stuffed with chicken parmesan; sausage, pepper, and onion; spinach and cheese; and more, all enveloped in a golden, glistening crust. One makes two meals, at least. Address: 134 Salem Street, North End Phone: 617-523-5601 Find online: bovabakeryboston.net Buenas Empanadas at Buenas Adam DeTour for The Boston Globe. Food styling by Sheila Jarnes. Argentinian-American owner Melissa Stefanini — a transplant from Los Angeles, like her Buenas partner Sebastian Galvez — started selling empanadas because she couldn’t find authentic ones close to home. Purists will be happy with her classic ground-beef-and-onion version, but creativity, and affordability, is what makes Buenas shine: trios of moon-shaped dough — stuffed with everything from saucy Frito pie bursting with enchilada sauce, to chicken and waffles, and even Cinnamon Toast Crunch — can be had for about $13, and make the ideal lunchtime sampler. Address: 1 Bow Market Way, Unit 14, Somerville Phone: Not available Find online: eatbuenas.com Dolma Mediterranean Cuisine Dolma Mediterranean Cuisine Shakshuka, red lentil soup, dolma (stuffed peppers), and other specialties are on the menu at this Turkish restaurant in Brookline. Yesim Otsuz, from Antalya, Turkey, along the Mediterranean coast, cooks the food of her homeland for guests, who can sit at tables inside or out. Address: 5 Kendall Street, Brookline Phone: 617-487-5852 Find online: dolmaboston.com Dumpling House Dumpling House Come with a small and hungry group and be prepared to share. The staff are efficient and professional, buzzing through this perennially busy Cambridge staple with plates of piping hot fresh dumplings. It would take months to move through Dumpling House’s entire menu. But to start, order up braised eggplant, steamed soup dumplings, and Szechuan dried crispy spicy chicken. Address: 950 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge Phone: 617-661-8066 Find online: dumplinghousema.com El Peñol Restaurante El Peñol Restaurante Lane Turner/Globe staff/File Almost nothing is over $20 at this trio of Colombian restaurants in East Boston, Brookline, and Revere. The dishes range from crisp, compact beef empanadas (a savory steal at $1.50), to cornmeal-crusted stewed chicken turnovers ($3.50), to thinly pounded fried chicken drenched in a velvety mushroom cream sauce, enough for three people at just $17. It’s friendly and family-run; Marina Balvin opened the first restaurant in 1998, and her family still oversees the kitchens. The staff hasn’t changed much, and neither have the prices. Address: 54 Bennington Street, East Boston Phone: 617-569-0100 Find online: elpenoleastboston.com Evergreen Eatery + Café Evergreen Eatery + Café We have mixed feelings about letting this secret out, but here goes: Evergreen, right off the Orange Line’s Green Street Station, is a delicious and affordable spot with something to delight everyone. The egg and cheese breakfast sandwich on an English muffin comes in under $5 — and is exponentially better than the similar offering at a certain ubiquitous local chain. A weekend splurge is the Golden Avocado Toast, with hard-boiled eggs and balsamic glaze, at about $13. There’s ample seating, including a biergarten-style patio that fits couples, friends, families, and groups. It’s the perfect spot for Jamaica Plain’s eclectic mix of residents — or a quick to-go bite on your way downtown. Address: 154 Green Street, Jamaica Plain Phone: 617-477-9573 Find online: evergreeneateryjp.com Flavor Boom! Flavor Boom! Lane Turner/Globe staff/File In a lunchtime landscape of assembly-line bowls, Flavor Boom! breaks the mold with tall cartons of rice, vegetables, and meats from around the world — Indonesian-inflected, milky beef rendang; Thai-inspired shrimp curry; a garlicky Moroccan blend of stewed eggplant and chickpeas. Founder Jim (Jun) Tao is a compulsive traveler; he’s been around the globe and longed to recreate the healthy, cheap fast food he devoured on his trips. These one-tub meals are about $11: cheaper than a plane ticket (and most sandwiches), and a transportive midday pick-me-up. In addition to a downtown location, find outposts in Jamaica Plain, Kendall Square, and Watertown. Address: 155 Milk Street, Downtown, and other locations Phone: 857-330-2846 Find online: flavorboom.com Gene’s Chinese Flatbread Cafe Gene’s Chinese Flatbread Cafe Adam DeTour for The Boston Globe. Food styling by Sheila Jarnes. Gene Wu’s hand-pulled noodles had already won a following when he opened this, his second restaurant, in 2013. (He now has branches in Woburn and Westford as well.) They are magnificent: thick, chewy, rustic, and topped with chili oil, cilantro, and drifts of raw garlic or cumin-laced lamb. You can also get them in steamy soups. The Downtown Crossing restaurant serves flatbread sandwiches (hence its name) for around $6, plus spicy lamb skewers, and other specialties from Wu’s native Xi’an. Address: 86 Bedford Street, Downtown Crossing Phone: 617-482-1888 Find online: genescafe.com Gyro City Gyro City Jonathan Wiggs/Globe staff Gyro City achieves velocity with some of the best (and, importantly, largest) gyros in Boston. Fast and affordable, the sandwiches feature tender meat, crispy fries, and delicious sauces — tzatziki with pork and mustard sauce with chicken. Other classics such as the Greek salad, the souvlaki, and the spanakopita are also hits, or venture deeper into the menu for under-the-radar gems like the kolokithokeftedes (zucchini fritters) or gemista (stuffed pepper and tomato). Address: 183 Chestnut Hill Avenue, Brighton Phone: 617-903-4248 Find online: gyrocityma.com Hemlock Grill Hemlock Grill Barry Chin/Globe staff/File You don’t have to play (or even like) golf to go wild over Alex Sáenz’s restaurant inside the Robert T. Lynch Municipal Golf Course, which is open to the public. A 1930s clubhouse with wood paneling is the setting, though you can sit outside overlooking the links. The chef is known for his fried chicken sandwich ($13), fish and chips ($16), pulled pork ($12), and more — all at prices you don’t usually associate with food at the 19th hole. Address: 1281 West Roxbury Parkway, Chestnut Hill Phone: 617-879-5687 Find online: hemlockgrill.com Hot Box A pretension-free ode to an only-in-Massachusetts rivalry: South Shore bar pizza versus North Shore roast beef. Bar pizza is the burnt-edges exemplar of the form, coated to the edges with burbling mozzarella and cheddar; the roast beef here is best savored “Arbeez” style, piled onto a griddled roll and folded into puddles of American cheese sauce. Take either to go from Bow Market for under $15. Address: 1 Bow Market Way, Unit 6, Somerville Phone: 617-284-9600 Find online: eathotbox.com Life Alive Organic Cafe Life Alive Organic Cafe Herbaceous, umami-packed ingredients tie together the grain bowls, wraps, and noodle soups that have made this local vegetarian chain a staple for the health-conscious. Finish your meal with a fruit smoothie or cold pressed juice; it’s affordable fast-casual fare at its most nourishing. There are locations around the Boston area, as well as more in Dedham, Lowell, and Salem. Address: 765 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, and other locations Phone: 617-354-5433 Find online: lifealive.com M&M Barbecue M&M Barbecue Adam DeTour for The Boston Globe. Food styling by Sheila Jarnes. Maurice and Marion Hill (they’re the M&Ms) started the family barbecue business in 1982, but their grandson Geo Lambert took over and took it to new heights with his food truck, catering business, and, since 2020, his restaurant inside Dorchester Brewing Co. The ribs, brisket, and pulled pork are justifiably famous – and make their way into towering sandwiches like the Geneva Ave (brisket, pickled onions, smoked cheese sauce) and Columbia Rd (pulled pork, crushed red peppers, pickled red cabbage). But don’t ignore the mac and cheese, barbecue baked beans, and other sides. Salads and a plant-based chicken sandwich are on the menu, too. Address: 1250 Massachusetts Avenue, Dorchester Phone: 617-307-7674 Find online: mandmbbq.com Mi Pueblito Restaurant Mi Pueblito Restaurant Vincent Alban for the Boston Globe/File The bonus at this family-friendly East Boston gem is that it offers delights from three culinary traditions. Mi Pueblito’s Mexican food, such as the chiles rellenos and fajitas, is sublime, as are Guatemalan and Salvadoran dishes including a cheese and loroco pupusa that has an intoxicating aroma from
