---
id: 378
url: https://thedyrt.com/press/2025-best-places-to-camp-in-the-northeast-region/
title: 2025 Best Places to Camp in the Northeast Region
domain: thedyrt.com
source_date: '2025-06-29'
tags:
- recipe
summary: 'The Northeast offers diverse camping options ranked by The Dyrt community,
  with Town Hall Road in New Hampshire''s White Mountain National Forest taking the
  #1 spot for its free, serene dispersed camping experience. The top 2025 campgrounds
  range from rustic backcountry sites to luxury resort-style facilities like Normandy
  Farms in Massachusetts, each providing unique experiences near mountains, lakes,
  forests, and coastlines. These award-winning campgrounds cater to various preferences—from
  solitude seekers to families wanting amenities—and are all based on camper reviews
  and ratings.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# 2025 Best Places to Camp in the Northeast Region

You’re never too far from mountains, lakes, forests and miles of rugged coastline no matter where your next camping adventure lies in the Northeast. Relaxation is the name of the game, and these 10 campgrounds are winners every time. From tranquil and serene spots secluded in the woods to resort-style amenities in close proximity to major cities, the Northeast boasts campgrounds as unique and diverse as its climate. One year after claiming the second spot on the list, Town Hall Road dispersed camping in New Hampshire is No. 1 among the 2025 Best Places to Camp in the Northeast Region. Normandy Farms in Massachusetts is No. 3 for the second straight year, Cherry Hill Park in Maryland remains in the Top 5, and Trap Pond State Park in Delaware returns as well. Check out these and the rest of this year’s Best Places to Camp Regional Award winners in the Northeast Region, which are based on reviews and ratings from The Dyrt’s vast community of campers. 1. Town Hall Road — White Mountain National Forest — New Hampshire Location: Chatham, NH What makes it great: Camping along Town Hall Road offers a serene experience in the heart of the White Mountain National Forest. This free, dispersed camping area is perfect for those seeking solitude and natural beauty. The road is well-maintained and navigable for most vehicles, including smaller RVs. Sites are generously spaced and privacy and seclusion are practically amenities. Many spots are nestled near Slippery Brook, offering the soothing sounds of flowing water and opportunities for wildlife viewing. While man-made amenities are minimal — no restrooms, water or cell service — the pristine environment more than compensates. Campers can enjoy hiking trails and fishing holes in this true backcountry experience. Town Hall Road is a well-known hidden gem and a must-try for anyone looking for classic camping in New England . What The Dyrt’s community of campers has to say: “We loved this spot. There were plenty of sites to choose from and most (not all) had access to the river as well as a fire ring. Sites were on a dirt road, but it was quiet for the most part. Sites were also a good distance from each other so it felt pretty private.” — Josie W “My first ever dispersed camping experience. So freaking amazing and unbelievable. … beautiful view of the water and even a path down to swim. 10/10 experience and I can’t wait to go back.” — Atlas W Campground details Price: Free Number of sites: 8-10 RV sites: Yes Fires allowed: Yes Pets allowed: Yes Read more 2. Schoodic Woods Campground — Acadia National Park — Maine Location: Winter Harbor, ME What makes it great: Schoodic Woods Campground is nestled on the Schoodic Peninsula in Acadia National Park, which is among the most beautiful natural settings in the Northeast. This campground in the only national park in New England hosts tent, RV, group and hike-in campers, and each site is equipped with a picnic table and fire ring. The optimal location also provides easy access to over eight miles of hiking trails and bike paths, as well as the scenic Schoodic Loop Road, which offers views of lighthouses, seabirds and forested islands. Nearby Schoodic Point is a prime spot for tidepooling or just gazing at the ocean. The peaceful atmosphere makes Schoodic Woods a standout destination for campers seeking a quieter alternative to the more crowded areas of Acadia. What The Dyrt’s community of campers has to say: “We just spent 4 wonderful nights here and it is possibly my favorite campground, ever. The campground is relatively new and although they could have fit more sites in here, I am so glad they did not.” — Sue J “Definitely one of the nicer spots I’ve been! This park is located in one of Maine’s most visited areas. Great evening weather all throughout the summer. Plenty of wildlife around to keep your ears busy. Got a great tent spot here but they offer a little bit of everything!” — John R Campground details Price: $22-$60 Number of sites: 50 RV sites: Yes Fires allowed: Yes Pets allowed: Yes Read more 3. Normandy Farms Campground — Massachusetts Location: Foxborough, MA What makes it great: Normandy Farms offers a premier camping experience blending nature with luxury. Situated between Boston and Cape Cod, the 20,000-square-foot recreation lodge is the heart of the resort, featuring an indoor pool, sauna, fitness center and wellness services like yoga and massage. Outdoor activities are covered too, with four swimming pools, an 18-hole disc golf course, stocked fishing pond, and a bike park with a pump track and jump line. Sports facilities include basketball, soccer, tennis, pickleball and volleyball. Normandy Farms also has plenty to keep the kiddos busy with daily activities like arts and crafts, scavenger hunts and themed events. Adults can unwind with evening entertainment and happy hours. Pet owners will appreciate the enormous dog park, complete with agility equipment, a dog wash, and even canine coops for temporary pet care. With diverse accommodations ranging from tent sites to luxury yurts, Normandy Farms offers a memorable camping experience for all. What The Dyrt’s community of campers has to say: “Normandy Farm has something for everyone and then some. 4 pools, an activity center lodge you could hold a beautiful wedding for a couple hundred in. From Dining, to an RC race track to a huge disc golf course to an awesome store and gift shop to large camp sites and lots of friendly guests from all over.” — Jennifer H “This is the place that will raise the bar for all the others. Everything was fantastic. If I could pick ONE thing to improve it would be bigger shower stalls. But seriously. There is so much to do and so much amazing staff that you’d never have to leave.” — Sonyia W Campground details Price: $50-$200 Number of sites: 400 RV sites: Yes Fires allowed: Yes Pets allowed: Yes Read more 4. Mount Desert Campground — Maine Location: Bar Harbor, ME What makes it great: Mount Desert Campground is located on Mount Desert Island, which provides a serene and well-maintained camping experience just minutes from Acadia National Park. The campground features a variety of sites, including waterfront platforms and wooded areas, many equipped with fire rings, picnic tables and access to potable water. Facilities are clean and conveniently located, while The Gathering Place serves as a hub for campers, providing Wi-Fi, morning pastries and evening ice cream. Guests can also rent kayaks to explore the nearby Somes Sound. The campground’s central location allows easy access to Acadia’s hiking trails, biking paths, and local attractions. Whatever mood you’re in, adventure or relaxation are both available in abundance. What The Dyrt’s community of campers has to say: “We camped for years and years at Mount Desert Campground with our four children and my Sister-in-Law and her two sons. The kids are all grown now and are taking their own camping trips to this amazing place. It is a family run campground with immaculate grounds. … There are lovely camp roads to walk, run, or bike. Fresh air to breathe, an epic long dock to catch and release crabs near, kayak or canoe rentals, and so much more.” — Laurie H “This place is Primo. This campground is beautiful, in a great location and perfect for tent, camper van or very small trailer camping.” — Chris F Campground details Price: $38-$97 Number of sites: 250 RV sites: Yes Fires allowed: Yes Pets allowed: Yes (no in July/August) Read more 5. Cherry Hill Park — Maryland Location: College Park, MD What makes it great: Cherry Hill Park has been family owned for more than 100 years. It offers a premier camping experience with a blend of outdoor charm and resort-style amenities and is the ideal base camp for exploring everything Washington, D.C., has to offer. The campground boasts a variety of accommodations, including tent sites, RV hookups, glamping pods and premium log cabins. Each site is equipped with picnic tables, fire rings and easy access to clean bathhouses. Guests can enjoy a range of amenities, including two solar-warmed pools, a splash park, hot tub and an 18-hole mini-golf course. The campground also offers convenient services like propane and firewood delivery, dog walking, and a secure entrance with keycard-only access. Cherry Hill Park provides easy access to the National Mall via a seasonal express bus or local Metrobus, making it a convenient choice for those looking to explore the nation’s capital. What The Dyrt’s community of campers has to say: “We just stayed one night as we were passing through the area, but we were very impressed by this park. It is huge, but so pretty and clean. There’s multiple bath houses, playgrounds and even pools. There is also a mini golf course and splash park. … We are already planning our next visit to this park and can’t wait!” — @HomegrownRV “If you’re visiting Washington, this is the place to stay. … To be honest, it’s a great place to stay even if you’re not visiting D.C. They have two swimming pools, a cafe, playgrounds, well-stocked camp store, delivery of firewood, ice, and cafe orders, and a concierge to help with travel and tourist sites.” — Matt S Campground details Price: $92 and up Number of sites: 390 RV sites: Yes Fires allowed: Yes Pets allowed: Yes Book it on The Dyrt 6. Grafton Notch Campground — Maine Location: Newry, ME What makes it great: Grafton Notch Campground is a nature-lover’s paradise ideal for hikers and outdoor enthusiasts. With only 15 wooded sites, the campground provides a tranquil atmosphere, allowing campers to fully disconnect from daily life. Each site is equipped with a picnic table and fire ring, and guests can enjoy activities like horseshoes, cornhole and frisbee in the central field area. The campground’s proximity to Grafton Notch State Park offers access to renowned hiking trails such as the Old Speck Trail and Table Rock Loop, as well as scenic spots like Screw Auger Falls and Moose Cave. Throughou
