---
id: 453
url: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2025/05/26/a-secret-trove-of-rare-guitars-heads-to-the-met
title: A Secret Trove of Rare Guitars Heads to the Met | The New Yorker
domain: www.newyorker.com
source_date: '2025-05-22'
tags:
- music
- nonfiction-book
summary: The Metropolitan Museum of Art has acquired a world-renowned private collection
  of vintage American guitars assembled over nearly four decades by wealthy publishing
  heir Dirk Ziff and record producer Perry Margouleff. The long-secretive collection,
  which was revealed to Met director Max Hollein and curator Jayson Dobney, will be
  displayed in a permanent gallery opening in spring 2027, allowing the public to
  finally see these iconic instruments and understand the cultural and artistic significance
  of the American guitar in the twentieth century.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# A Secret Trove of Rare Guitars Heads to the Met | The New Yorker

Save this story Save this story Save this story Save this story In 2007, Jayson Dobney, an Iowan with a master’s degree in the history of musical instruments, from the University of South Dakota, moved to New York to be a curator in the department of musical instruments at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. For decades, there had been whispers in guitar circles of a vast trove of twentieth-century guitars, in private hands, somewhere in the tri-state area—an El Dorado of coveted Strats and Les Pauls and Martins of impeccable provenance. Even in Vermillion, South Dakota, Dobney had heard the rumors. Coming east, he wanted to learn more, especially because the Met’s instruments department, for all its heirlooms (the world’s oldest piano, three Stradivarius violins, a Mayan double whistle), possessed almost nothing from the twentieth century. In 2011, Dobney put together an exhibition celebrating the work of the Italian American luthiers who had designed and built the archtop guitars beloved by jazz musicians. Seeking objects for the show, he met a record producer and guitar maven named Perry Margouleff, who said that he might have a few instruments to share, as an anonymous lender. Dobney visited a warehouse outside the city where, in a reception area, Margouleff showed him eight guitars. “It was so secretive that when I, as a curator of the Met, came to visit, I had no idea what was actually there. I just saw those eight guitars,” Dobney told me recently. Unseen that day was the rest of the collection, the one that so many people had wondered about. Also unseen: the man who owns it, Dirk Ziff, a wealthy publishing heir and financier with a reputation, too, as a connoisseur and a guitarist who had recorded and toured with Carly Simon. Few people were aware that the two men had spent decades working together to assemble what is now recognized as the world’s finest collection of vintage guitars. Dobney had some insight into the power that such objects might possess. Early in his Met tenure, Dobney, whose thesis at South Dakota was titled “Innovations in American Snare Drums: 1850–1920,” got Ringo Starr to lend the museum his gold-plated Ludwig snare (given to him by Ludwig, after the Beatles’ 1964 appearance on “The Ed Sullivan Show” juiced sales). “Everyone was shocked that there was a line out the door just of people who wanted to get their photo taken with a little drum in a case,” Dobney said. He finally met Ziff in 2019, when Ziff came to the museum for a private tour of “Play It Loud,” an exhibition of totemic rock instruments, which was a collaboration between the Met and the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame. Ziff and Margouleff had lent eleven guitars, and Margouleff had also wrangled the instruments (and coöperation) of Jimmy Page, Keith Richards, Eric Clapton, and Eddie Van Halen. Ziff and Dobney spent hours together, talking gear. Margouleff had long believed that the Ziff collection should be shared with the public and had floated the idea of building a museum, but Ziff preferred a low profile, and patience. “We’ll get to that,” he would say. Generally, the big institutions looked down on guitars. Margouleff told me, “After the Guggenheim did an exhibition on the art of the motorcycle, I said to the guy there, ‘You should do guitars.’ He said, ‘Over my dead body.’ As Jimmy Page says, guitars were tarred by the brush of rock and roll. We’d been told no so many times. We really needed a museum to ask us .” A J-50 acoustic guitar made by Gibson in 1955 and played by Mississippi John Hurt. “Play It Loud” was among the most well-attended exhibitions in the museum’s history. Max Hollein, who had started as the Met’s director the year before, had a mandate to modernize the programming and attract a new generation of visitors and donors. A few months after the show closed, Hollein made a trip to the warehouse. This time, Ziff and Margouleff opened the vault. “That was my eureka moment,” Hollein told me. “The collection blew me away. I thought, This should and must be at the Met. ” The guitar, he said, is “one of the most—if not the most—iconic American objects of the twentieth century.” Last year, Ziff and Margouleff donated the collection to the Met. In the spring of 2027, the museum will open a permanent gallery devoted to the evolution and cultural impact of the American guitar. One Sunday last month, I paid a visit to the warehouse, in a light-industrial area. “You were never here,” Margouleff said, ushering me inside. It was his winking way of confirming that I’d honor a promise not to reveal its location. Margouleff had on jeans and a faded Crocker Motorcycles T-shirt. He has sideburns and long gray hair, and wears honey-tinted, oversized Jackie O. glasses. He carries himself with the assurance of a man who knows his business and can fix anything and has met a certain subset of everybody—that is, all the people he’d want to meet, which is another way of saying he has more than one Bob Dylan story. He doesn’t suffer fools or jerks, has exacting standards in matters luthieristic and otherwise (Italian food, wine, manners, business dealings), and since childhood has considered himself essentially unemployable. He’s a car buff, too, and built a dune buggy when he was nine. One of his measures of character is the degree to which you truly care about guitars, but he is not a snob. He wants everyone to play, even poorly. He is married (he and his wife live in Connecticut) but has never wanted kids. The guitars are his children. Margouleff led me through a tidy workshop and into a reception area with a kitchenette and a wall of a half-dozen supersized Vox amps. “No one knows what’s in the collection,” he said. “We try to keep it as private as humanly possible. Sometimes people reach out to me and offer me something, and I think, You’re trying to sell me something I already own. ” Ziff once got a call from a dealer offering him the highly coveted “Brock Burst” 1959 Les Paul Custom, named for a collector. The dealer asked for half the money up front, not knowing that Ziff already had the Brock Burst under the bed he was sitting on. Margouleff’s pronouns tend to blur ownership and agency. Sometimes when he says “I,” he means “we,” as in he and Ziff, or really “he,” as in just Ziff. A patron-steward dynamic pertains. In the early days, Margouleff’s counterparties doubted that “Dirk Ziff” even existed. Ziff isn’t merely the moneybags, but he has another life: family, high finance, various passions and enterprises. (He is the principal owner of the World Surf League, the governing body of pro surfing.) Margouleff is the guy on the ground. One collector referred to him as “Dirk’s guitar pimp.” Margouleff would prefer “guitarcheologist.” “I am the owner, and technically the gift to the Met is from me,” Ziff said. “But I think of it as a gift from both of us, because we have done this together, over the course of almost forty years.” Margouleff was nine years old when, in 1969, his brother, who was eighteen, took him from their home on Long Island to the Fillmore East to see the Who perform “Tommy.” The music was galvanizing, but what really seized his soul was the sight and sound of Pete Townshend’s red Gibson SG Special. “I was abducted by the guitar,” Margouleff likes to say. A week later, Margouleff’s brother persuaded their parents to take them back to the city, to Manny’s Music, on the stretch of West Forty-eighth Street known as Music Row. They emerged with an SG like Townshend’s. By the time Margouleff was twelve, he was a regular glass-fogger on Music Row. He noticed some things. One was that the used guitars at We Buy Guitars sounded better than the new ones across the street at Manny’s and yet cost less than half as much. The rock guitarists he admired seemed to prefer the older ones, too. Another was that the sight of those used guitars hanging there on baling wire, strung up by their headstocks, knocking against one another, filled him with sadness, of a kind that others might feel when encountering a box of abandoned puppies. He thought, I have to save them. I have to find them good homes . “He had a quick temper, but who in these parts does not?” Cartoon by Frank Cotham Copy link to cartoon Copy link to cartoon Link copied Shop Shop That summer, Margouleff earned just enough working construction to purchase his first collectible guitar, a 1963 Gibson Johnny Smith archtop, for eleven hundred dollars, from a local buff named Russell Hirsch, who became his first guitar mentor. A year later, Margouleff tracked down a 1963 Gibson Firebird, like the one he’d seen Johnny Winter play at the Beacon. By the time Margouleff was fourteen, he’d worked his way into the good graces of the infamously cantankerous shop owners on Music Row, and had infiltrated the tessellation of men, most of them a decade or more his senior, who shared his ardor for used guitars that were not yet considered vintage, or even particularly collectible. He began driving up and down the East Coast, without a license but with an ever more refined sense of which instruments were worth saving, and at what price. By sixteen, he was running a brisk trade—selling his instruments only when necessary, to raise money to buy better ones. He decided to commit to guitars full time. “You have to stay in school,” his English teacher said. Then, when he told her he was clearing as much as a thousand dollars a week, she said, “Drop out of school.” Margouleff’s father, the chief of nuclear medicine at North Shore Hospital, was appalled. “You’ll wind up as a homeless person pumping gas,” he told his son. With the impetuousness of youth, and the conviction of the convert, Margouleff left home and moved to Manhattan. He got work as an assistant engineer at Sundragon Studios, where the Ramones, Talking Heads, and David Johansen, among others, cut albums. (Margouleff eventually started a line of amps, called Sundragon, with Jimmy Page.) It was more than a dozen years before h
