---
id: 372
url: https://www.laphamsquarterly.org/roundtable/all-good-editors-are-pirates
title: All Good Editors Are Pirates | Lapham’s Quarterly
domain: www.laphamsquarterly.org
source_date: '2025-07-01'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- video
summary: This tribute to editor Lewis H. Lapham reflects on the author's eight years
  working at *Lapham's Quarterly*, the magazine he founded in 2007 as a digest of
  historical ideas and thought. The piece celebrates Lapham's editorial philosophy—that
  "all good editors are pirates"—highlighting his meticulous work ethic, collaborative
  approach, and commitment to exquisite writing over hierarchy, which fundamentally
  shaped how the author later founded her own publication. Through vivid anecdotes
  of late-night literary gatherings and office culture, the author portrays Lapham
  as a freeing, inspiring mentor who demonstrated how to build a thriving intellectual
  magazine while maintaining irreverence toward the American establishment.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# All Good Editors Are Pirates | Lapham’s Quarterly

Set design model for Giuseppe Verdi’s Otello , by Marcel Jambon, 1895. Wikimedia Commons . This remembrance first appeared in Stranger’s Guide on July 28, 2024. O n July 23, 2024, the American essayist and editor Lewis H. Lapham died. Since then several beautiful obituaries have been written about the great man and I won’t attempt to repeat these, though I certainly encourage reading them. Instead I want to focus on a very particular time and place where I worked with Lewis and knew him best—the book-filled offices of his last great project, Lapham’s Quarterly . After a storied tenure of nearly thirty years at Harper’s Magazine , Lewis founded Lapham’s Quarterly in 2007 as a magazine of the history of ideas. The offices were housed on Irving Place just off Union Square in Manhattan. Here I spent eight years as executive editor and found the offices to be a magical place filled with knowledge, wit, history, literature, and cigarette smoke. In those book-lined rooms I got an up-close lesson on how to start a magazine and how to run it with grace. It’s also where I met Abby Rapoport, Stranger’s Guide ’s publisher and my co-founder as we built our own magazine years later. Back in 2007 I was the first full-time editorial hire Lewis made. On my first day of work, I was greeted by the only other staff members in the office. The first was Ann Gollin, Lewis’ rock and longtime assistant. The second was a young intern in flip-flops and cut-off shorts. That was it, that was the entire operation. There was no website, no magazine, no subscribers. Instead there was just the beginning of Lewis’ idea that we cull through the great books and create a digest of thought and ideas. Each issue would be on a new theme, be it war, religion, or food. When I left eight years later, Lewis had built a thriving magazine with forty thousand subscribers and an annual gala—the Decades Ball—headlined by the likes of Tom Hanks and Anne Hathaway. There was a robust intellectual editorial board that met four times a year around a large wooden table to discuss Thucydides , Marx , or Hannah Arendt . But that all came later. On that very first day of work, Lewis took me out, first to a party at André Schiffrin’s penthouse apartment, where he introduced me to Joan Didion before slipping out to a late dinner at Elaine’s. Here we sat at what Lewis assured me was the best table in the house. Within minutes the grande dame herself, Elaine, plopped down at our table with a tremendous sigh, as if we were just the port in the storm she’d been waiting for. An endless stream of people dropped by to say hello or to drink or to argue politics late into the night. I was accustomed to a very different crowd—those of small leftist magazines and the New School philosophy graduate students. “Where am I?” I wondered. “What have I just signed on to?” When Lewis founded Lapham’s Quarterly , he had already been inducted into the American Society of Magazine Editors Hall of Fame. He was already famous as an essayist, editor, and author of countless books. But despite all his accolades, those early days at Lapham’s Quarterly had the feel of a 1940s movie about a plucky team of actors putting on a show, a kind of “Gee shucks folks, let’s make a magazine!” On Lewis’ desk, next to the ashtrays and the blue folders full of notes, sat the book How to Start a Magazine , which was hurriedly tucked away the day the New York Times came to photograph the offices. In those days, I was married to the magazine’s art director and we didn’t yet have kids. So almost every evening after work we’d head off for drinks with Lewis at the nearby bar, Paul & Jimmy’s, where Lewis quickly established himself as a regular. It was here we spent countless hours discussing this nascent publication, its cover, the printer, the feel of an issue, and ideas for themes and authors. Lewis was an incessantly hard worker; he was the first to arrive at the office and the last to leave. Almost every night after work he’d head off to a dinner, a book party, or some other glamorous literary event. Although he was already in his seventies, I never saw a man work harder. Each issue of Lapham’s Quarterly opened with an essay by Lewis that he would painstakingly labor over for weeks; seventeen drafts for one essay was not uncommon. Ann Gollin, his trusty accomplice in all things great and small, would diligently transcribe the essays he dictated on a small hand-held tape recorder. And then she’d transcribe them again, then yet again, as he crafted and re-crafted each sentence. Lewis would show everyone in the office his drafts, from the interns to the publisher, asking eagerly, “What do you think?” He looked for ideas and input everywhere. He was never an elitist even though he summered in Newport, his pocket squares were crisp, and his cufflinks shined. Lewis’ essays poked fun at the American ruling class from his position within the belly of the beast. For eight years I reveled in Lewis’s beautiful, WASPy, literary, irreverent world. He taught me to value voice and exquisite writing above all else. He taught me never to take the first thought of an author as their best thought but instead to spend luxurious hours talking over ideas with a writer until we hit upon the right concept. He wasn’t a saint. He could be selfish and old-fashioned, and at times he demanded loyalty beyond reason. But he was freeing to work for. Famously known as a laissez-faire editor, he never micromanaged. In fact, I’m not sure the words “manage” ever crossed his lips. He let people—his employees, the writers who wrote for him—have a free range. At least once a week he’d open the door of his office and look around the room of editors with a smile and ask, “Are you having fun?” Because he was having a ball. Lewis was fond of saying that “all good editors are pirates”—they steal from everyone. And I stole all my best ideas from him on how to start a magazine. So much so that when Abby Rapoport and I started Stranger’s Guide together, we had a blueprint for how it was done. When I told Lewis I was going to try my luck at starting a magazine with Abby, he did what he always did, bought me a drink at Paul & Jimmy’s and told me not to let anyone steer me off my course or tell me my ideas were wrong. I’m not sure he thought Abby and I could pull it off, but he liked pluck and that was enough for him. There will never be another like him, but if we are lucky there might be new incantations of his spirit. Or as Lewis liked to say, “History doesn’t repeat itself, but it does rhyme.” Since his death, only a few days ago, I’ve had countless conversations with old friends from that time, and every conversation inevitably concludes the same way: “Well,“ one of us says, “it’s the end of an era.” But to be honest, the era ended long before Lewis died. The New York literary scene is not what it once was—both for better and for worse. But, I could not have had a more splendid boss to waltz me through it than Lewis. Whenever things got rough in the office—if we weren’t sure where the money would come from or we were behind on a tight deadline—Lewis would look up from his desk, light a cigarette, smile, and say, “Onward, dear heart.” Contributor Kira Brunner Don Kira Brunner Don is the editor in chief and co-founder of Stranger’s Guide and was the founding executive editor of Lapham’s Quarterly . As editor, she has received four National Magazine Awards. She studied philosophy at The New School’s Graduate Faculty and worked as a journalist covering politics and culture around the world.
