---
id: 759
url: https://engineering.nyu.edu/sites/default/files/2021-10/How_I_Became_a_Quant%20%281%29.pdf
title: ' '
domain: engineering.nyu.edu
source_date: '2026-01-24'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- academic-paper
summary: '"How I Became a Quant" is a book featuring interviews and insights from
  25 elite quantitative analysts on Wall Street, documenting their diverse career
  paths into financial engineering and mathematical finance. The collection showcases
  how these professionals applied expertise in physics, mathematics, computer science,
  and other fields to develop trading strategies, risk management models, and financial
  innovations. Through their personal stories, the book provides aspiring quants with
  practical guidance on the skills, education, and career strategies needed to succeed
  in quantitative finance.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

#  

How I Became a Quant Insights From 25 of Wall Street’s Elite Richard R. Lindsey Barry Schachter John Wiley & Sons, Inc. How I Became a Quant Insights From 25 of Wall Street’s Elite Richard R. Lindsey Barry Schachter John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Copyright C⃝2007 by Richard R. Lindsey and Barry Schachter. All rights reserved. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. Published simultaneously in Canada. Wiley Bicentennial Logo: Richard J. Paciﬁco No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978)-750-8400, fax (978)-646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201)-748-6011, fax (201)-748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions. Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and the author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation.You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages. For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800)-762-2974, outside the United States at (317)-572-3993 or fax (317)-572-4002. Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our Web site at www.wiley.com. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data How I became a quant : insights from 25 of Wall Street’s elite / [compiled and edited by] Richard R. Lindsey, Barry Schachter. p. cm. Includes index. ISBN 978-0-470-05062-0 (cloth) 1. Quantitative analysts–United States–Biography. 2. Wall Street (New York, N.Y.)– Biography. 3. Finance–Mathematical models. 4. Finance–Computer programs. 5. Financial engineering. I. Lindsey, Richard R., 1954- II. Schachter, Barry. III. Title: Wall Street’s elite. HG172.A2H69 2007 322.63′2042–dc22 2007002383 Printed in the United States of America. 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Rich would like to dedicate this book to his daughter Nancy, age 4, in the hope that she can ﬁnd a partial answer contained herein when she starts to wonder what he did when she was growing up. In the same spirit, Barry would like to dedicate this book to his daughter Devra, age 18, who for many years has been asking, “What do you do at work, Daddy?”, in the conviction that she will ﬁnd in its contents a more satisfying answer than she has invariably received previously, speciﬁcally, “I worry about stuff.” Contents Acknowledgments xiii Introduction 1 Chapter 1 David Leinweber President, Leinweber & Co. 9 A Series of Accidents 10 Grey Silver Shadow 13 Destroy before Reading 16 A Little Artiﬁcial Intelligence Goes a Long Way 18 How Do You Keep the Rats from Eating the Wires 20 Stocks Are Stories, Bonds Are Mathematics 23 HAL’s Broker 26 Chapter 2 Ronald N. Kahn Global Head of Advanced Equity Strategies, Barclays Global Investors 29 Physics to Finance 30 BARRA’s First Rocket Scientist 34 v vi C O N T E N T S Active Portfolio Management 42 Barclays Global Investors 44 The Future 46 Chapter 3 Gregg E. Berman Strategic Business Development, RiskMetrics Group 49 A Quantitative Beginning 50 Putting It to the Test 53 A Martian Summer 57 Physics on Trial 57 A Twist of Fate 59 A Point of Inﬂection 60 A Circuitous Route to Wall Street 61 The Last Mile 65 Chapter 4 Evan Schulman Chairman, Upstream Technologies, LLC 67 Measurement 68 Market Cycles 69 Process 69 Risk 70 And Return 71 Trading Costs 72 Informationless Trades 73 Applying it All 73 Electronic Trading 75 Lattice Trading 75 Net Exchange 76 Upstream 79 Articles 81 Chapter 5 Leslie Rahl President, Capital Market Risk Advisors 83 Growing Up in Manhattan 83 College and Graduate School 85 Nineteen Years at Citibank 88 Fifteen Years (So Far!) Running Capital Market Risk Advisors 90 Contents vii Going Plural 92 The Personal Side 92 So How Did I Become a Quant? 92 Chapter 6 Thomas C. Wilson Chief Insurance Risk Ofﬁcer, ING Group 95 Quantitative Finance: The Means to an End? 96 The Questions 98 The Early 1990s: The Market Risk Era 99 The Late 1990s: The Credit Risk Era 101 The Great Strategy Debate: From the 1990s to Today 102 Lessons Learned 104 Chapter 7 Neil Chriss Former Managing Director of Quantitative Strategies, SAC Capital Management, LLC 107 The Glass Bead Game 108 Of Explorers and Mountain Climbers 111 Computers 113 College Years 117 The University of Chicago PhD Program 118 Academia 120 The Harvard Mathematics Department 124 Moving to Wall Street 125 Quant Research 127 Quant Research and the Mathematics of Portfolio Trading 128 Quantitative Portfolio Management 130 Mathematical Finance Education 131 Final Thoughts 133 Chapter 8 Peter Carr Head of Quantitative Financial Research, Bloomberg 137 My First Eureka Moment 138 Accounting for the Future Instead of the Past 139 viii C O N T E N T S Postdoctoral Studies 140 And in the End . . . 141 Chapter 9 Mark Anson CEO, Hermes Pensions Management Ltd. CEO, British Telecommunications Pension Scheme 143 PhD, Why Not? 144 Legal Arbitrage 146 Managing the Outcome 148 Certain Uncertainty 149 Chapter 10 Bjorn Flesaker Senior Quant, Bloomberg L.P. 151 Growing Up 152 Choosing Academics 155 Heeding the Call of the Street 160 Becoming a Real Quant Again 162 Chapter 11 Peter Jäckel 163 The English Connection 164 London Calling 165 Cutting One’s Teeth 167 All the Models in the World 168 For Future Reference 170 To the Front 173 Chapter 12 Andrew Davidson President, Andrew Davidson & Co., Inc. 177 Conjecture 1: If It Quacks Like a Quant . . . 177 Lemma 1: If You Don’t Know Where You Are Going, Any Road Will Get You There 179 Lemma 2: Pay No Attention to the Man behind the Curtain 181 Contents ix Theorem 1: If It May Be True in Theory but It Won’t Work in Practice, Get a Better Theory 182 Theorem 2: To Thine Own Self Be True 185 Chapter 13 Andrew B. Weisman Managing Director, Merrill Lynch 187 Econometric Voodoo 188 Trading for Fun and Proﬁt 189 Tools of the Trade 190 Lessons Learned 194 Chapter 14 Clifford S. Asness Managing and Founding Principal, AQR Capital Management, LLC 197 Chicago 198 A Big Decision 199 On Our Own 202 Moonlighting 206 Geeks of the World Unite 207 Chapter 15 Stephen Kealhofer Managing Partner, Diversiﬁed Credit Investments 211 A Startup 213 Practical Defaults 214 The Entrepreneur 217 Inventing a Business 219 Portfolio Management of Credit Risk 220 A Room with a View 223 Chapter 16 Julian Shaw Head Risk Management & Quantitative Research, Permal Group 227 Gordon Capital 229 CIBC 231 Barclays Capital 232 x C O N T E N T S Fat Tails and Thin Peaks 233 Adventures in CDO Land 234 The Strange Evolution of Value at Risk 235 A Paradox 236 Permal 236 What Makes a Good Quant? 237 The Art of Leaving Things Out 238 The Art of Choosing the Right Tools 238 Do Quants Lack Business Sense? 240 Tips 241 Chapter 17 Steve Allen Deputy Director, Masters Program in Mathematics in Finance, Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University 243 In Which the Author Is Seriously Misled 243 In Which a Fortuitous Opportunity Appears 246 In Which Reason Prevails and All Rejoice 248 Chapter 18 Mark Kritzman President and CEO, Windham Capital Management, LLC 251 A Brief Chronology 252 How I Developed My Quant Skills 254 How I Applied My Quantitative Training 255 The Future for Quants 261 Chapter 19 Bruce I. Jacobs and Kenneth N. Levy Principals, Jacobs Levy Equity Management 263 Portraits of Two Investors 264 New Concepts, Foggy Ideas 265 The Jacobs Levy Investment Approach 268 Beneﬁts of Disentangling 269 Integrating the Investment Process 273 Relaxing Portfolio Constraints 275 Contents xi Integrated Long-Short Optimization 277 Books and an Ethical Debate 278 Portfolio Optimization and Market Simulation with Shorting 281 Chapter 20 Tanya Styblo Beder Chairman, SBCC 285 Yale 286 First Boston 289 Graduate School 290 Swaps 292 Giving Back 293 Chapter 21 Allan Malz Head of Risk Management, Clinton Group 295 How Not to Get a PhD 296 How Not to Get a PhD, Continued 297 RiskMetrics’ Salad Days 300 No More Mr. Nice Guy 302 Chapter 22 Peter Muller Senior Advisor, Morgan Stanley 305 What’s that Smell? 305 Life at BARRA 308 You Gotta Know When to Fold ’em 310 The Call that Changed Everything 312 Chapter 23 Andrew J. Sterge President, AJ Sterge (a division of Magnetar Financial, LLC) 317 On to the Real World 320 Cooper Neff 321 Early Days at Cooper Neff 322 Active Portfolio Strategies 324 How I Became a Quant 327 xii C O N T E N T S Chapter 24 John F. (Jack) Marshall Senior Principal of Marshall, Tucker & Associates, LLC and Vice Chairman of the International Securities Exchange 329 From Premed to Derivatives 330 Frustration with Academia and the Birth of a Profession 331 The IAFE and the Road to MSFE Degrees 334 Notes 339 Bibliography 359 About the Contributors 363 About the Authors 379 Index 381 Acknowledgments W e would like to acknowledge our editors, Bill Falloon and Emilie Herman of Wiley, for their efforts and support; Sara Pick and Paige Lesniak for administrative support through- out the process; and Rebecca Lindsey (who is not a quant!) for her care- ful reading and editing of this work. Barry would like to thank Karen Hoogsteen, for her always-ready support, encouragement, and patience. Finally, we want to thank each of the contributors for taking time out of their busy lives to share their experiences. xiii Introduction B ecause you are reading this introduction, one of four things must be true. You are a quant and are intrigued by the idea of reading the stories of others like you. You are not a quant, but aspire to quantness, and you are seeking some insight on how to achieve that goal. You are neither a quant, nor have such aspirations, but you want to understand the way Wall Street really works, perhaps to gain some perspective on the vast and unsympathetic forces affecting your life in mysterious ways. Or, misshelved among the science ﬁction and fantasy titles by a harried employee, the title has struck your fancy as, perhaps, a potentially satisfying space opera. There might be other things besides these four, but we can’t think of any. For all of you except the fourth group, we are pretty sure this book will provide considerable satisfaction. (For the fourth group, who knows?) By way of introduction, we will explain from our perspective the roots, roles, and contributions of the Wall Street quant. We begin by deﬁning the Quant. Mark Joshi, a famous quant, has proposed this deﬁnition: A quant designs and implements mathematical models for the pricing of derivatives, assessment of risk, or predicting market movements.1 1 2 how i became a quant Perhaps some of the terms used in this deﬁnition require deﬁnition themselves. A mathematical model is a formula, equation, group of equa- tions, or computational algorithm that attempts to explain some type of relationship. For example, Einstein’s famous e = mc2 is a model that describes the relationship between energy and mass. Quants implement models that focus on ﬁnancial relationships. Per- haps the most famous of these is the Black-Scholes option pricing for- mula, which describes the relationship between the prices of two ﬁnan- cial instruments that have a particular connection. The development of the Black-Scholes model (between 1969 and 1973) is often cited as one of the factors that started the quant revolution on Wall Street, but that is an oversimpliﬁcation. Returning to the deﬁnition of a quant, the derivatives for which quants design models are ﬁnancial instruments whose values depend on (or are determined by) the future value of some quantity. This deﬁnition may seem vague—and it is. Derivatives exist in such variety that any deﬁnition hoping to be all-encompassing has to be vague. One concrete and ubiquitous example of a derivative is an equity call option (a call). Someone who buys a call has purchased the future right to buy the speciﬁed company’s common shares, not at the market price, but at the price stated in the option contract. Options have been around for a long time, but one date is commonly cited as the trigger for the derivatives revolution (which is inextricably associated with the quant revolution). That date is April 26, 1973, though to call this the beginning of the derivatives revolution is an oversimpli- ﬁcation. On this date there was an earthquake off the coast of Hawaii, but the real earthquake that day was in Chicago. The Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE) became the ﬁrst organized exchange to have regular trading in equity options. A humble beginning, certainly, as only 911 option contracts were traded on 16 different equities. Now, each year, hundreds of millions of equity option contracts on thousands of companies trade on dozens of exchanges (both physical and electronic) around the world. The key ingredient that ties quants to derivatives and the other two functions identiﬁed by Joshi (risk assessment and predicting markets) is mathematical know-how. The Black-Scholes option pricing formula is a good example of this. Introduction 3 The model, as it was ﬁrst presented, was obtained by employing a re- sult from physics, the solution to a particular partial differential equation called the heat-transfer equation. The level of abstractness involved in this work frequently inspires awe, fear, and even derision among nonquants. Consider this quotation from Time magazine of April 1994, cited by Peter Bernstein: “Prices of derivatives are not based on old-fashioned human hunches but on calculations designed and monitored by com- puter wizards using abstruse mathematical formulas . . . developed by so-called quants . . . ”2 Wizards, indeed. Even Emanuel Derman, one of the most famous of quants, feels compelled to assert that “[t]he Black-Scholes model tells us, almost miraculously, how to manufacture an option . . . ”3 (italics added). As the knowledge necessary to perform such feats is not a part of the regular secondary-school math curriculum, facility with derivatives requires a level of quantitative (hence “quant”) training and skill conﬁned to the mathematical specialist. Where can these specialists be found? For Wall Street, the breeding grounds of future quants are the halls of academe, and more speciﬁcally, graduate departments of physics, mathematics, engineering, and (to a lesser extent) ﬁnance and economics. The favored candidates are hold- ers of the degree of PhD, but not exclusively so. More recently, a new breeding ground of quants has arisen in schools that have begun teach- ing more focused curricula, leading to master’s in quantitative ﬁnance, master’s in ﬁnancial engineering, master’s in computational ﬁnance, and master’s in mathematical ﬁnance, for example. Okay—the reader will now be asking, “So that’s what quants do and where they come from, but why do they do it?” The obvious answer, as you readers of the second group have already ﬁgured out, is that being a quant is ﬁnancially rewarding. It is ﬁnancially rewarding because a quant produces something with signiﬁcant utility in the ﬁnancial marketplace. Still, such an answer would have been greeted with derision by the famous mathematician G. H. Hardy. In his apologia to mathematics research he states, The “real” mathematics of the ‘real’ mathematicians, the mathematics of Fermat and Euler and Gauss and Abel and Riemann, is almost wholly “useless” . . . It is not possible to 4 how i became a quant justify the life of any genuine professional mathematician on the ground of the ‘utility’ of his work.4 But before we weep for quants who, while well-rewarded ﬁnancially, have failed to justify their lives when measured by Hardy’s yardstick, it must be noted that the yardstick has a crack in it. The work of two of Hardy’s icons, Pierre Fermat and Frederick Gauss, perhaps above all other mathematicians, have contributed to the utility of quants’ efforts. In truth, Hardy’s view is really a throwback to the Middle Ages, when the idea of science was governed by the Aristotelian concept of knowledge as tautology. In other words, all things that we can say we know to be true can be proven true by mathematical logic alone. Utility is not a consideration. In contrast, the Enlightenment view of science (the view of Francis Bacon and his intellectual followers) deﬁnes science in terms of improving the understanding of the forces at work in the world with which we interact. In this context, utility is a natural measure of scientiﬁc contribution. Fermat, in the seventeenth century, was the ﬁrst to correctly solve certain problems related to games of chance, problems posed to him (and to Blaise Pascal, a mathematician famous for his triangle, among other things) by a well-known player of such games, the Chevalier de Mere, who was looking, not for Aristotelian truth, but for the proper rules to use to split the pot of cash wagered in a game that ends before there is a winner. If Fermat wasn’t a quant by Joshi’s deﬁnition, then we can’t tell a quant from a quail. As Douglas Adams (author of the science ﬁction classic, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy) said, “If it looks like a duck, and quacks like a duck, we have at least to consider the possibility that we have a small aquatic bird of the family anatidae on our hands.” It is worth noting that Fermat’s work was not the ﬁrst to address pot-splitting; methods of splitting the pot in unﬁnished games of chance predated Fermat’s solution. However, his innovation replaced the earlier ad hoc, incorrect practice, with a new, fair distribution method. Such is the nature of many of the contributions or innovations made by quants. Options as distinct ﬁnancial instruments have been traded for hundreds of years. For example, options on agricultural commodities were traded regularly during the American Civil War. Early twentieth- century ﬁnancial market participants in Chicago and New York actively Introduction 5 traded commodity and equity options during regular time periods, albeit off the exchange ﬂoors, and prices were reported in the papers. Like Fermat, what Fischer Black and Myron Scholes (and Robert Merton) added, was a way to determine the “fair” value of an option (subject to various caveats related to the reasonableness of the model’s assumptions). Once adopted, their solution replaced the prior ad hoc pricing approach. Fermat is not the only historical example of a scientist devising a ﬁnancial innovation that today would label him as a quant. A particularly striking example is the role quants played in improving government ﬁnance practices as far back as the sixteenth century. A common means of ﬁnancing municipal and state debt in the Renaissance was the issuance of life annuities. In return for providing a sum to the government, the provider could designate that a regular annual payment go to a designee for life. The annuity was the return over time of both the amount lent and interest on the loan. Originally, governments, in setting the amount of the annuity to be paid, did not take into account the age of payee. In some cases, the life annuity payments already equaled the initial sum provided in exchange within six years. Quite a boon for a very young and healthy designee! In 1671, the mathematician Johan de Witt developed a model based on the work of an even more famous mathematician, Christian Huygens, to compute an annuity payment that fairly reﬂected the expected remaining life of the payee. So the quant revolution didn’t start in 1973. Nor can it be exclu- sively attributed to the development of the Black-Scholes model. But something caused a “quantum” change in the signiﬁcance of roles played by quants. What was it? Conventional wisdom identiﬁes several, almost contemporaneous, factors. The beginning of trading in exchange-listed equity options, and the publication of the Black-Scholes option pric- ing model result, both in 1973, have already been noted. Also cited by pundits is the explosive advance in computing power, including the arrival of desktop computing around 1980. Technological developments made practical the analysis of many previously daunting mathematical problems. Numerical methods for solving problems are rarely consid- ered elegant or beautiful by academics, for whom these are important criteria in judging a model’s value. For quants, however, the result is what matters. 6 how i became a quant The last factor commonly included in this list is the dramatic increase in the volatility of prices, or to put it differently, an increase in uncertainty about the future value of assets. This increase in uncertainty resulted from several factors, including the abandonment of ﬁxed exchange rates in 1973, the elimination of Vietnam War era price controls in 1974, the Oil Embargo of 1973, the high inﬂation environment of the immediate postVietnam War period, the deregulation of international trade in goods and services, and the relaxation of controls in international capital ﬂows. This increasing volatility or uncertainty was the true catalyst for the quant revolution. To put it more accurately, it was the aversion to increas- ing uncertainty experienced by ﬁnancial market participants—actual, live humans—that led to the quant revolution. There may be no consensus among the ﬁnancial theorists about how people perceive uncertainty (or misperceive it, as emphasized by Nassim Taleb5 ). There also may be no consensus about how people cope with (i.e., make choices or decisions under) uncertainty. Nevertheless, everyone accepts that people don’t like it.6 When faced with an increase in uncertainty, people try to avoid it. That avoidance may manifest itself in various ways. The quant revolution has given people the opportunity to avoid unwanted ﬁnancial risk by literally trading it away, or more speciﬁcally, paying someone else to take on the unwanted risk. Not long after publication of the Black-Scholes option pricing model, academics and practitioners began to view it as providing a blueprint for modifying exposure to risk, rather than simply as a method for determining the fair value of an esoteric ﬁnancial instrument.7 When people buy and sell ﬁnancial instruments, they are trading risks. Buying a bond issued by General Motors is taking on a speciﬁc set of risks related to potential future bankruptcy and ﬂuctuations in future interest rates. The return expected from that transaction is compensation for the risk taken on. In this sense, all ﬁnancial instruments can be thought of baskets of risks. When you start thinking this way, it is a small step to begin to look for other risks that can be traded, and thus to view in a new light the way all risks are traded, and to think of new ﬁnancial instruments that will allow those risks to be traded, either individually or combined in unique ways. Introduction 7 In 1997, the Nobel prize committee put it this way, when they hon- ored Scholes and Merton with the Prize in Economic Science (Black had died by this date, and the Nobel prize is not awarded posthumously): “Their methodology has . . . generated many new types of ﬁnancial in- struments and facilitated more efﬁcient risk management in society.”8 Once this new way of thinking took hold, the possibilities for cre- ating new ways to allow people to modify their exposure to risk or to share risks among themselves were seen to be almost literally inﬁnite, and so, also, were the potential proﬁts to Wall Street ﬁrms obtained from providing these new risk-shifting opportunities to market participants. There really was only one missing ingredient. That missing ingredient, the intellectual horsepower to develop mathematical models to fulﬁll the dream of unlimited ability to manage risks through trading ﬁnancial instruments, brings us full circle. As Perry Mehring said, Originally a somewhat motley bunch of ex-physicists, math- ematicians, and computer scientists, joined by a very few ﬁ- nance academics . . . had been drawn to Wall Street by the de- mand for quantitative skills to support the increasing technical sophistication of investment practice at the leading investment houses.9 The motley bunch, the providers of the horsepower, are the quants. Here are the stories of just a few of them. Chapter 1 David Leinweber President, Leinweber & Co. I wish I could tell one of those stories about how, when I was in the eighth grade, I noticed a pricing anomaly between the out-of- the-money calls on soybean futures across the Peruvian and London markets and started a hedge fund in my treehouse and now own Cleve- land. But I can’t. In the eighth grade I was just a nerdy kid trying to keep my boisterous pals from blowing up my room by mixing all the chemicals together and throwing in a match. In fact, I really can’t tell any true stories about eighth graders starting hedge funds in tree- houses buying Cleveland. Make it sophomores in dorm rooms who buy chunks of Chicago, Bermuda, or the Cayman Islands, and we have lots of material. 9 10 how i became a quant A Series of Accidents My eventual quantdom was not the culmination of a single-minded, eye-on-the-prize march to fulﬁll my destiny. It was the result of a series of accidents. In college, my interest in ﬁnance was approximately zero. I came to MIT in 1970 as a math major, as did many others, because I didn’t know much about other subjects like physics or computer science. I quickly discovered the best gadgets were outside the math department. And the guys in the math department were a little weird, even by MIT standards. This was back when even a pretty crummy computer cost more than an average house. A good one cost millions, and ﬁlled a room the size of a basketball court. MIT, the ultimate toy store for geeks, had acquired a substantial inventory of computing machinery, starting as soon as it was invented, or sooner, by inventing it themselves. The professors kept the latest and greatest for themselves and their graduate student lackeys, but they were happy to turf last year’s model to the undergrads. Foremost among these slightly obsolete treasures was the PDP-1-X, which is now justly enshrined in the Computer Museum. The PDP-1-X was a tricked-out version of the PDP-1, the ﬁrst product of the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC). The story of DEC is an early computer industry legend now fading in an era where many people believe Bill Gates invented binary numbers. DEC founder Ken Olsen worked at MIT’s Lincoln Laboratory, where the Air Force was spending furiously to address a central ques- tion facing the nation after World War II: “What do we do about the Bomb?” Think about the air war in World War I. There were guys in open cockpits wearing scarves yelling, “Curse you, Red Baron!” By the end of World War II, just 30 years later, they were potential destroyers of worlds. Avoiding the realization of that potential became a central goal of the United States. If a Soviet bomb was headed our way, it would come from the north. A parabolic ballistic trajectory over the pole was how the rockets of the era could reach us. This begat the Distant Early Warning (DEW) and Ballistic Missile Early Warning (BMEW) lines of radars across the northern regions of Alaska and Canada. The DEW and BMEW lines, conceived for military purposes, drove much of the innovation that we David Leinweber 11 see everywhere today. Lines of radars produce noisy analog signals that need to be combined and monitored. Digital/analog converters were ﬁrst on the DEW line, now in your iPod. Modems, to send the signals from one radar computer to others, were ﬁrst developed to keep the Cold War cold. Computers themselves, excruciatingly large and unreliable when constructed from tubes, became transistorized, and less excruciating. This is where Ken Olsen comes in. Working at MIT to develop the ﬁrst transistorized computers for the DEW line, he and his colleagues built a series of experimental machines, the TX-0 (transistor experiment zero), the TX-1, and the TX-2. The last, the TX-2, actually worked well enough to become a mother lode of innovation. The ﬁrst modem was attached to it, as was the ﬁrst graphic display, and the ﬁrst computer audio. Olsen, a bright and entrepreneurial sort, realized that he knew more about building transistorized computers than anyone else, and he knew where to sell them—to the U.S. government. Federal procurement reg- ulations in the early 1960s required Cabinet-level approval for the pur- chase of a computer, but a Programmable Data Processor (PDP) could be purchased by garden-variety civil servants. Thus was born the PDP-1 and its successors, up to the PDP-10, like the one at Harvard’s Aiken Comp Lab used by a sophomore named Gates to write the ﬁrst Microsoft product in 1973. Today, almost any teenage nerd has more computational gear than they know what to do with. But in the 1970s, access to a machine like the PDP-1, with graphics, sound, plotting, and a supportive hacker1 culture was a rare opportunity. It was also the ﬁrst of the series of accidents that eventually led me into quantitative ﬁnance. I wish could I could say that I realized the PDP-1 would allow me to use the insights of Fisher Black, Myron Scholes, and Robert Merton to become a god of the options market and buy Chicago, but those were the guys at O’Connor and Chicago Research and Trading, not me. I used the machine to simulate nuclear physics experiments for the lab that adopted me as a sophomore. They ﬂew down to use the particle accelerators at Brookhaven National Lab to ﬁnd out the meaning of life, the universe, and everything else by smashing one atomic nucleus into another. Sort of a demolition derby with protons. But sometimes 12 how i became a quant a spurious side reaction splatted right on top of whatever it was they wanted to see on the glass photographic plates used to collect the re- sults. My simulations on the PDP-1 let us move the knobs controlling electromagnets the size of dump trucks so the spurious garbage showed up where it wouldn’t bother us. It was fun to go down to Brookhaven and run the experiments. The head of the lab was a friendly, distinguished Norwegian professor named Harald Enge. As a young man, Harald built the radios used by the Norwegian underground group that sank the ship transporting heavy water to Hitler’s nuclear bomb lab. Arguably, this set the Nazi A-bomb project back far enough for the Allies to win the war, so we were all fans of Harald. He drove a Lincoln so large that there were many streets in Boston he could not enter, and many turns he could not make. It was worth it for safety, he explained. As a nuclear scientist who spent his career smashing one (admittedly very small) object into another, he explained that he had an innate sense of the conservation of momentum and energy, and was willing to take the long way around to be the big dog of p and E. Senior year, I planned on sticking around for graduate school as a physics computer nerd, a decision based more on inertia than anything else. Then I met the saddest grad student at MIT. The nuclear physicists were replacing those glass photographic plates with electronic detectors. These were arrays of very ﬁne wires, arranged very close to each other to emulate the ﬁne resolution of photography. This grad student had made a 1,024-wire detector, soldering 1,024 tiny wires parallel to each other, then 2,048 wires. He was currently toiling over a 4,096-wire version. The work was so microscopic that a sneeze or quiver could screw the whole deal. He’d been at it for a year and half. At around the same time, Harald showed me, and the other under- grads considering physics graduate school, a survey from the American Institute of Physics of the top employers of physics PhDs. An A in the survey meant, “Send us more,” while a D meant, “We’re trying to get rid of the ones we’ve got.” There were hundreds of organizations. There were no “As.” This two-part accident, meeting the grad student in 4K wire hell and seeing that I would be lucky to ﬁnd a job in a place like Oak Ridge (which, to the eyes of a New York City kid, looked like the moon but with trees), sent me to computer science graduate school, a step closer to becoming a quant. David Leinweber 13 Harvard University, the school up the road that once wanted to merge with MIT and call the combination Harvard, had a ﬁne-looking graduate program in computer science with courses in computer graph- ics taught by luminaries David Evans and Ivan Sutherland. Harvard not only let me in—it paid for everything. Instead of making a right out my front door, I’d make a left. I could stay in town and continue to chase the same crowd of Wellesley girls I’d been chasing for the previous four years. I showed up in September 1974 and registered for the ﬁrst of the graphics courses. Much to my surprise, my registration came back saying the courses weren’t offered. I had discovered the notorious Harvard bracket. The course catalog was an impressive, brick-sized paperback with courses covering, more or less, the sum of human knowledge. Many were discreetly listed in brackets. The brackets, I discovered, meant, “We used to teach this, or would like to. But the faculty involved have died or otherwise departed. But it sure is a ﬁne-looking course.” The Harvard marching band used to do a salute to the catalog, where about half of the band would form brackets around the rest, and the people inside the brackets would wander off to the sidelines, leaving nothing. My de facto advisor, Harry Lewis, then a ﬁrst-year professor, later Dean of the College, suggested that the accident of the missing graphics track allowed me to sample the grand buffet of courses actually taught at the university. The Business School had a reputation for good teaching, and offered courses with enough math to pass my department’s sniff test. So off I went across the river for courses in the mathematics of stock market prices and options. They were more of a diversion than an avo- cation, but the accident of the brackets had more inﬂuence subsequently than I could have imagined at the time. Harry also enlisted me as the department’s representative on the Committee on Graduate Education, which gave me a reason to hang out in the dean’s ofﬁce. He was on the board of the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, and suggested it might be a nice place to work, right on the beach with no blizzards. I put it on my list. Grey Silver Shadow When the time came to ﬁnd a real job, I was going out to UCLA to inter- view for a faculty position, and I added RAND to the schedule. UCLA 14 how i became a quant told me to stay in the Holiday Inn on Wilshire Boulevard, rent a car, and come out in February of 1977. On the appointed day, I opened my door in Inman Square to drive to Logan Airport and saw that a ferocious storm had buried all the cars up their antennae. I dragged my bag to the MTA station, and dragged myself onto a delayed ﬂight to Los Angeles. At this point, I had never been west of Pennsylvania Dutch country. Leaving the tundra of Boston for balmy Los Angeles was an eye-opener from the beginning. At LAX, I went to retrieve the nasty econo-box rental car that had been arranged for me. I was told they were fresh out of nasty econo-boxes, and would have to substitute a souped-up TransAm instead. Not that I knew what that was. It turned out to be a sleek new metallic green muscle car, with a vibrating air scoop poking up through the hood. I was a nerd arriving in style. Leaving the airport, I found myself on the best road I’d ever seen, the San Diego Freeway, I-405. This was in the pre–Big Dig days of Storrow Drive, so my standard for comparison was abysmally low. The 405 made a transition via a spectacular cloverleaf onto an even better road, the Santa Monica Freeway. I later learned that this intersection, designed by a woman, is considered an exemplar of freeway style. It sure impressed me. The UCLA recruiter’s hotel advice was ﬂawed. There were two Holiday Inns on Wilshire Boulevard. One near campus, the other further east, across the street from the Beverly Wilshire Hotel near Rodeo Drive, the hotel later made famous in Pretty Woman. I drove through Beverly Hills in blissful ignorance, thinking it was a pretty fancy neighborhood for a college. Street signs in Boston were mostly missing. Here, they were huge, and placed blocks ahead, so drivers could smoothly choose their lane. The sidewalks actually sparkled. Beverly Hills uses a special high-mica-ﬂake-content concrete to do this. There were no sixties acid burnouts jaywalking across my path. Cars were clean, new, fancy, and without body damage. We weren’t in Cambridge anymore. I steered my rumbling TransAm into the parking lot for the hotel, and got out. I wore the standard-issue long-haired grad-student garb of Levis, ﬂannel shirt, and cheap boots. A white Lamborghini pulled in, just in front of me. This was the model with gull wing doors, selling for about half a million, even then. I’d never seen anything like it outside of a Bond movie. The wings swung up, and two spectacularly stunning starlet types, in low-cut tight white leather jumpsuits, emerged. Big hair, David Leinweber 15 spike heels, lots of makeup. In Cambridge, it was considered politically incorrect for women to look different from men while wearing clothes. In LA this did not pose a problem. Before I could resume normal respiration, a well-dressed gent walked up and dropped a set of keys in my hand. “Grey Silver Shadow,” he said. I had no idea he was talking about a car so lavishly priced that I could not buy it with three years’ salary for the UCLA and RAND jobs combined. A quicker thinker would have said “Yes, sir!” and driven the Rolls off to Mexico with the Lamborghini girls. I meekly explained that I wasn’t the attendant and gave the keys back. This remains one of my great regrets. So how does this advance the plot of how I became a quant? I ended up at RAND doing nice civilian work such as artiﬁcial-intelligence- inspired analysis of econometric models for the Department of Energy and the EPA and helping with the design of a storm surge barrier for the Dutch water ministry. All very interesting, but fairly remote from quantitative ﬁnance. In 1980, Reagan won the election, and promised to abolish both the EPA and the DoE. He didn’t quite do that, but the cash ﬂow to RAND from those agencies slowed to a trickle. The Dutch stopped analyzing and started building the Oosterschelde Storm Surge Barrier.2 I was drafted into the military side of RAND. There were classiﬁed and unclassiﬁed sides of the building, separated by thick secure glass doors operated by guards. I moved over, and ﬁlled out the paperwork to upgrade my security clearance to Top Secret. Everyone needed a secret just to get in the building. The project I was handed3 could have been called “We’re kind of worried about the space shuttle.” In 1980, the shuttle was two years late, $5 billion over budget, and 40,000 pounds overweight. The Air Force and the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, which were the biggest customers, were justly concerned. As things turned out, they were right. According to the schedule that accompanied the sales pitch, the shuttle was to have ﬂown 400 ﬂights in its ﬁrst ten years. The most recent launch on December 9, 2006, after almost 26 years, was number 116. The ﬂeet was grounded for two year-long periods after the accidents in 1986 and 2003. All of this was not unanticipated by the engineers in 1980. The pacing-size payloads for the shuttle—the ones it was too heavy to carry—were experimental platforms for testing sensors designed to 16 how i became a quant be operated by people, the mission specialists. They would interpret the results of experiments and decide on the next steps. Now, it looked like they wouldn’t be there. Ground links weren’t an option. This left the Pentagon with a problem. Here is a complex system, the sensor platform, getting instructions over wires, and sending back results that require analysis and decision in real time. Lucky for me, that also turned out to be a description of ﬁnancial markets and trading rooms. When the people can’t be there, the technological solution is some sort of real-time artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). The state of the art of AI at the time ran toward theorem proving and dealing with other static problems. My mission was to ﬁnd promising places to foster the growth of real-time AI and have the boys in the ﬁve-sided nuthouse write checks to make it happen. In the course of that work, I visited all of the AI companies that were too big to ﬁt in a garage. Most were scattered in the vicinity of MIT, Stanford, and CMU. They had cryptic sci-ﬁnames like Intel- licorp, Inference, Symbolics, and LISP Machines.4 When you show up with the Pentagon’s checkbook, you get the good lunch. In this case, that meant “not from the vending machine.” So I spent quality time with the top AI nerds and their business chaperones on both coasts. Sometimes there were promising technologies, but there was always in- teresting company. This was the same crowd that had formed around the PDP-1 at MIT—always in spirit, and often in person. I felt right at home. Destroy before Reading This went on for a couple of years, working on the rocketry aspects of the “What about the shuttle” project when I wasn’t sharing take-out Chinese food with the AI guys. We wrote up what we found. Most of it was lightly classiﬁed by the Air Force ofﬁcers at RAND. Lightly classiﬁed means secret or conﬁdential. The latter is rarely used. Rumor had it that the Soviet ambassador was cleared for conﬁdential. Dealing with secret material was not all that onerous. You could carry it on commercial aircraft, inside double envelopes and with a permission slip. You could read it in a RAND ofﬁce with the window open. David Leinweber 17 Top Secret, and beyond, is another world entirely. It’s not quite “Destroy before Reading,” but it’s close. No civilian planes to move it around. Military escort required. Go down to a vault to read it. Don’t write anything down. Expect your phone to make funny noises and your mail to be late. I was glad not to have to deal with it. But in 1983, President Reagan gave his “Star Wars” speech, and everything having anything to do with the military use of space became so highly classiﬁed it made your teeth hurt. I had a ﬁle cabinet in my ofﬁce, with a large collection of articles from Aviation Week and the New York Times. Nothing classiﬁed at all. I kept that in my “secret locker” down the hall. My lunch was in the cabinet’s bottom drawer, along with beverages and salty snacks for the after-hours time on the beach. One day, two guys in blue uniforms came in from the USAF Space Division in El Segundo. They loaded my ﬁle cabinet onto a cart and the following conversation ensued. Me: “Hey, there’s nothing much in there except for stuff from Aviation Week.” Blue Suiter: “They publish a lot that they shouldn’t publish.” Me: “Maybe so, but the cat’s out of the bag once they print it. Do you know how many copies of Aviation Week go to the Soviet Embassy?” Blue Suiter: “Nope” Me: “I do, 285. ‘Think there’s anything in there they don’t already know?” Blue Suiter: “We’ve got our orders.” Me: “Okay, but can I keep my lunch? Want some snacks?” If that wasn’t weird enough, a few weeks later I was called in to the classiﬁcation ofﬁce to review a paper I’d written for an academic confer- ence on space and national security. After the ﬁle cabinet experience, I had taken extreme care to use only the most publicly available material I could ﬁnd, and to avoid Aviation Week entirely. For security reasons, we’ll give RAND’s Air Force classiﬁcation ofﬁcer a secret identity: Major Pain. Major Pain: “I have some problems with your paper.” Me: “For instance . . .” 18 how i became a quant Major Pain: “Over here, where you talk about the ‘National Technical Means of Veriﬁcation.’ ” (1980s diplomat-speak for spy and warning satellites) Me: “That’s straight from a speech Jimmy Carter gave on television. That’s why it’s in quotation marks next to his name.” Major Pain: “I know. He said a lot he shouldn’t have said.” Me: “With due respect, he was commander-in-chief and you’re a major.” Major Pain: “But I’m your major, and this conference is next week.” Me: “You win, Jimmy’s gone. Anything else?” Major: “Of course.” It was time to become a civilian. I called my pals at the AI companies and made a beeline for the door. I ended up working for Steven Wyle,5 the chairman at LISP Machines Inc., who conveniently had set up ofﬁces right in Los Angeles. (Most of the company was back in Cambridge.) LISP Machines had some of the most promising real-time AI capabilities, which ran on the special-purpose LISP computer that LMI and its rival Symbolics both manufactured. That there were two companies that licensed the same technology from MIT at the same time was a testimonial to the inability of nerds to get along. A Little Artiﬁcial Intelligence Goes a Long Way LMI was founded by Rick Greenblatt, the machine’s inventor. He had a habit of leaving Nutty Buddies (vending-machine ice cream cones topped with chocolate and nuts) in his front pocket and forgetting about them. This made for a distinctive fashion statement. He was also an early avatar of the free software, open-source movement, which later became GNU and Linux. Richard Stallman was encamped there. Symbolics, founded by the AI Lab administrator, who wore a suit with no food on it, was more businesslike. Both companies quickly fell victim to the fate of computer ﬁrms that make special-purpose machines. If you ever want to start one of David Leinweber 19 these, do something with better prospects of success like invading Russia in winter. AI was getting great press in the 1980s, better than it deserved. Business magazines hawked the “Breakthrough of the Century” and “Machines That Think.” In fact, AI’s successes and capabilities were more modest, but it was good at making computers easier to use. All the noise attracted people from places other than the computer research labs that formed the original market for LISP machines (and Symbolics, and the rest). At LISP Machines, my portfolio included space applications, communications, and all the sorts of applications people at RAND worried about. When people from Wall Street started showing up, the boss asked, “Who can talk to these guys?” and I ﬁnally got to make some use of my off-major experience in graduate school. Options guys from Chicago? I knew delta wasn’t just an airline. Traders from Wall Street? I knew a bid from an ask, and an option from a future. By default, I became the in-house ambassador to ﬁnance. As the hardware ﬁrms were thinning out, I went across the street to Inference Corporation, a software-only AI ﬁrm that shared investors (and at one point, ofﬁces) with LISP Machines. Another fortunate accident was that they had just hired Don Putnam as president, luring him away from the institutional ﬁnancial service ﬁrm, SEI Investments. When I met Don, he hired me on the spot and told me to forget about satellites and the DoD, and spend all my time on ﬁnance. No more Major Pains. It sounded good to me. Inference’s product was called the Automated Reasoning Tool, really a sort of syntax relief for LISP. It had modules for nearly every artiﬁcial intelligence technique. NASA was the biggest customer. Don worked some kind of deal with Quotron,6 then the major market data vendor and conveniently located down the street, that allowed us to use actual market data to try out our wacky ideas. This might have been one of the ﬁrst times anyone actually tied the consolidated feed to an expert system. Our modest efforts at a prototype were immodestly called the ART Quotron Universal Investment Reasoning Engine—AQUIRE, which had a nice Gordon Gekko feel to it (even though the actual Gordon from Wall Street was a year away, in 1987). As it turned out, the “Universal In- vestment Reasoning” demonstrated in AQUIRE consisted of variations 20 how i became a quant on crossover rules—comparisons of moving averages. These seemed to be a favorite of the New York visitors, and were easy to program. Many of the traders had their own secret-sauce variations on this theme, com- bining different averaging intervals and lags. The former math professors from Chicago preferred complex arbitrage relations and formulae in- volving the entire Greek alphabet, which took more time to program. All of this ran on playbacks of recorded data, so we could ﬁx our mistakes and replicate the examples our customers showed us. It also pointed up the tragic ﬂaw in LISP based trading systems: garbage col- lection. AI programs tended to grab and then abandon large chunks of memory.7 The system would perio
