---
id: 829
url: https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v48/n02/christian-lorentzen/i-m-always-in-the-club
title: 'Christian Lorentzen · I’m always in the club: Peter Matthiessen in Paris'
domain: www.lrb.co.uk
source_date: '2026-02-16'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- politics
summary: Peter Matthiessen, a young writer recruited into the CIA in 1950, was connected
  to a Yale literary circle that included intelligence officer James Jesus Angleton
  and professor Norman Holmes Pearson, who served as a talent-spotter for the agency.
  Matthiessen's cover as a novelist proved convenient since he had just published
  his first short story and sailed to Paris in 1951 with his new wife Patsy Southgate,
  while simultaneously pursuing a secret intelligence career and engaging in personal
  relationships that reflected his lifelong struggle to reconcile his multiple identities.
  The biography traces how Matthiessen's experience in this world of literature, espionage,
  and self-discovery shaped his literary career and spiritual pursuits.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Christian Lorentzen · I’m always in the club: Peter Matthiessen in Paris

Vol. 48 No. 2 · 5 February 2026 I’m always in the club Christian Lorentzen Share on Bluesky Share on Facebook Share Email Print 5797 words True Nature: The Lives of Peter Matthiessen by Lance Richardson . Chatto, 709 pp., £30, October 2025, 978 1 78474 301 7 Show More Show More I t was ​ in a Quonset hut south of the Potomac that Peter Matthiessen met James Jesus Angleton, ‘a cadaverous, hawk-boned man with dark hair, large elfin ears and a lively intelligent face behind horn-rimmed glasses’, as Matthiessen later described him in an unpublished account of his recruitment to the CIA in the autumn of 1950. They had a ‘pleasant talk’. In True Nature , his new biography of Matthiessen, Lance Richardson speculates that they may have discussed poetry. Both men were protégés of Norman Holmes Pearson, an instructor in the English department at Yale. Pearson was a correspondent of Ezra Pound and Wallace Stevens as well as F.O. Matthiessen, the Harvard scholar and cousin of his pupil, who had taken his own life earlier in 1950 under a cloud of threats over his leftist leanings and homosexuality. Pearson was in these years at work on a study of Nathaniel Hawthorne; co-editing with W.H. Auden the five-volume anthology Poets of the English Language ; and starting the university’s American studies programme. At Yale before the war, Angleton had been a mediocre student, but he’d founded a literary magazine, Furioso , made a pilgrimage to Pound at his villa in Rapallo, and booked the poet’s 1939 tour of the United States. An undergraduate after the war, Matthiessen impressed Pearson with a paper on Faulkner written in his senior year. ‘Where have you been the last three years?’ Pearson asked. ‘You could have won the English prize!’ All three were members of the Elizabethan Club, a campus literary society which, in Richardson’s description, served ‘afternoon tea in a series of genteel rooms, perfect for private conversation … organised around a gargantuan walk-in safe containing a Shakespeare First Folio and a first edition of Milton’s Paradise Lost ’. Just think of those spooks whispering about pinkos over their cups of tea an arm’s length from an expensive old book about Satan. Matthiessen’s father was an architect and a naval reserve officer decorated for his service designing simulators to train gunners to shoot down German planes. Matthiessen missed out on the action: he turned eighteen a few weeks after Berlin fell and was stuck in basic training when Truman dropped the bombs on Japan. He did laundry duty for the navy at Pearl Harbor while he waited to start at Yale. Pearson spent the war in London as chief of the X-2 counterintelligence branch of the Office of Strategic Services, assisting with Ultra, the code-breaking project at Bletchley Park. His code name was ‘Puritan’, and he hired Angleton out of the army to be his right-hand man. They reported to MI6, and Angleton befriended Kim Philby, a bond that would keep him sniffing for moles in the ranks for the rest of his career. After the war Angleton ran X-2 in Italy, and following the CIA’s establishment in 1947 he became head of staff in its Office of Special Operations, which dealt with foreign intelligence, counterintelligence and espionage. (Election interference, sabotage and sponsorship of anti-communist guerrillas were the domain of the Office of Policy Co-ordination, the ‘cowboys’ to the OSO’s ‘librarians’.) Pearson turned down a job in Truman’s State Department to go back to Yale, where he moonlighted as a talent-spotter for his old deputy. Angleton took Matthiessen on a drive around Washington and told him that Paris was a plum assignment. Until then Matthiessen hadn’t realised he’d been hired. Three months of stateside training would be necessary. Matthiessen baulked at coming down to Washington because it ‘would blow my “cover” before I even had one’. Instead he ditched the teaching duties he’d taken on in New Haven and went to learn tradecraft at a safe house in Manhattan. It was ‘great fun’. He and his instructor did not know each other’s real names. The final test was to explain how he would go about discovering the man’s identity from details gleaned during their acquaintance. He passed, and in June 1951 sailed to France with his wife of four months, Patsy Southgate. His cover – young writer at work on a novel – had the virtue of being true. He was 24 and the Atlantic Monthly had just published his first short story. ‘Sadie’ is set in rural Georgia and narrated by a man called Webster who goes to a stable yard because he wants to buy a few dogs. The dog he most prizes, the ‘real pretty’ pointer that gives the story its title, is killed before he can make the purchase by a brutish poacher called Dewey Floyd who works as a yard hand and lives in the woods. Floyd tells Webster he did it because he was drunk: ‘You see, I was mighty close to them dawgs, an’ that li’l one were my fav’rit. Sadie were a real stylish dawg. I jes don’t know rightly what it was, how I could come to doin it. But I sure’n hell did it.’ He says he could kill a man sober, eyeing his boss, Pentland. ‘Sadie’, as Richardson points out, has several qualities, not a few of them nicked from Faulkner, that would mark Matthiessen’s more mature fiction: a lurid and exotic setting (Matthiessen had visited Jim Crow Georgia with a girlfriend he met in New York), characters’ voices rendered in vernacular dialect, the theme of racism and the use of racial slurs, conflicting accounts of ambiguous crimes and a volatile, charismatic, amoral outsider at the centre. The story got him the attention of the publisher John Farrar, who passed it to Edward Weeks at the Atlantic . Matthiessen was taken on as a client by ‘the toughest agent in town’. Bernice Baumgarten also represented John Dos Passos, Edna St Vincent Millay and Raymond Chandler, who sacked her for calling the Philip Marlowe of The Long Goodbye ‘too Christ-like and sentimental’. She would be hard on Matthiessen’s fiction as well. On receiving 35 pages of a novel in progress, Baumgarten wrote to him: ‘Dear Peter, James Fenimore Cooper wrote this 150 years ago, only he wrote it better. Yrs, Bernice.’ For now, Matthiessen had a secret day job, a new wife, and time to burn. He had met Patsy in Paris in 1949 when they were both exchange students. The daughter of a State Department diplomat and a DC socialite, she was an aspiring writer and a renowned beauty. In Jane Freilicher’s description, ‘with her golden hair, bright blue eyes and soft-spoken voice, it came as a surprise to find that she had a mind like a steel trap – she didn’t suffer fools gladly.’ Matthiessen had an exciting time as a student abroad. He wrote to an old girlfriend back home: ‘Our existence here continues in its usual extraordinary fashion – full, exciting, extremely stimulating and amusing, and very tiring indeed.’ To his journal he confided: ‘Would like to narrow social life down to N and P Southgate or somebody like her.’ N was Nathalie de Salzmann, a 29-year-old divorced mother of three. From childhood she had been a devotee, like her parents, of the mystic G.I. Gurdjieff and ‘the Work’, his ‘proprietary system for self-realisation’. ‘Gurdjieff taught,’ Richardson writes, ‘that most people are asleep, barely conscious automatons who float through their lives without ever fully living them … And in this state of passive sleepwalking, we mistake our mechanical reactions for who we think we are: a singular unchanging “me”. But in reality we are a multiplicity of “I’s”, all of them different parts of a dormant true self.’ As Richardson’s exhaustive and insightful book shows, Matthiessen spent his life trying to wake his dormant true self. Despite his eventual success as a novelist and attainment of the status of Zen master, he kept shuffling his multiplicity of I’s all the way to the grave. Matthiessen’s affair with N ended after a pregnancy scare and a rebuffed proposal of marriage. Once he and Patsy returned from their year in France, he took to spending his weekends with her at Smith. Engagement was a trend among his Yale classmates after graduation, and he fell in line. ‘Much as I loved that beautiful girl,’ he said, ‘I also knew that I was setting aside, perhaps forever, a strong desire to travel light and see the world.’ In truth none of his three marriages, or the three children and three stepchildren that came along with them, would stop him seeing the world, and for most of the time between his high school years and his death from leukaemia in 2014 at 86 he was emotionally involved with at least two women at once. ‘When you’re 23, it seems pretty romantic to go to Paris with yr beautiful young wife to serve as an intelligence agent and write the Great American Novel into the bargain,’ Matthiessen wrote to his friend Ben Bradlee. ‘Weren’t you ever as young and dumb as that?’ ‘I’m always in the club drinking martinis,’ he told an interviewer when asked to recall his younger self. ‘What did I know from politics?’ (Richardson doesn’t find in Matthiessen’s letters and journals a coherent politics, but some leftist tendencies emerge in a remark on ‘the startling parallel between communist doctrine and the teachings of Jesus Christ’ and in his sympathy for blacklisted celebrities like Paul Robeson, who ‘got a shitty deal’.) If it were merely a matter of Matthiessen’s reputation as a writer, such explanations might have sufficed, but soon after his arrival in France, he made some new friends, and they started the Paris Review . Since Matthiessen’s employment by the CIA was first reported by the New York Times in 1977, the magazine has had the taint of the association. Given the tendency of its founders, their children and their editorial heirs to memorialise the magazine’s beginnings incessantly, often in the pursuit of fundraising, the issue keeps raising its still un-declassified head, to the extent that many young writers have the impression that since the end of the Seco
