---
id: 897
url: https://www.usgs.gov/observatories/yvo/news/echinus-geyser-back-action-now
title: Echinus Geyser is back in action! For now… | U.S. Geological Survey
domain: www.usgs.gov
source_date: '2026-03-04'
tags:
- news
summary: Echinus Geyser, the world's largest acidic geyser located in Yellowstone's
  Norris Geyser Basin, has resumed erupting after being largely dormant since 2020,
  with regular eruptions occurring every 2-5 hours starting in mid-February 2026.
  The geyser's activity is highly variable, having been a consistent performer in
  the 1970s-1990s before declining activity in the early 2000s, and scientists are
  monitoring whether this current resurgence will continue through the summer or if
  the geyser will return to dormancy as it typically does. Its unique acidic chemistry,
  combined with rare eruption patterns reaching 6-10 meters in height, makes Echinus
  a distinctive thermal feature in one of Yellowstone's most dynamic geothermal areas.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Echinus Geyser is back in action! For now… | U.S. Geological Survey

Echinus Geyser is back in action! For now… Subscribe to receive "Caldera Chronicles" articles via email By Yellowstone Volcano Observatory March 2, 2026 The world’s largest acidic geyser is located in Norris Geyser Basin. Lately, it’s been putting on quite a show. Yellowstone Caldera Chronicles is a weekly column written by scientists and collaborators of the Yellowstone Volcano Observatory. This week's contribution is from Michael Poland, geophysicist with the U.S. Geological Survey and Scientist-in-Charge of the Yellowstone Volcano Observatory. Norris Geyser Basin is known for being the hottest and most dynamic of Yellowstone National Park’s thermal areas—and that’s saying something! It is home to Steamboat Geyser , the tallest active geyser on Earth, and it contains an interesting and chaotic mix of acidic and neutral features in terms of chemistry. Media Sources/Usage: Public Domain. View Media Details Echinus is a rare acidic geyser. Temperature is measured in the outlet channel that carries much of the erupted water. Rapid temperature increases in geyser outlet channels typically reflect increases in flow due to eruptions. In the Back Basin of Norris Geyser Basin, about 200 meters (660 feet) away from Steamboat Geyser, is Echinus Geyser . The name comes from mineralogist Albert Charles Peale, who visited the geyser in 1878 and thought the rocks around the geyser looked like sea urchins—a type of animal known as an echinoderm. The geyser pool is about 20 meters (66 feet) across. Paradoxically, the geyser has an acidic chemistry, and it is the largest acidic geyser in the world. That sounds a bit scary, but the acid is not concentrated. Rather, it’s a bit like orange juice or vinegar. Acid geysers are rare because acidic water can break down the rock that makes up a geyser’s plumbing system. At Echinus Geyser, however, the composition is due to mixing between acidic gases and neutral waters, and the acidity is not sufficient to eat away at the rock. The somewhat unique water chemistry results in interesting formations and compositions, including the red color (from iron, aluminum, and arsenic) that rims the geyser pool and the silica-covered spiny rocks that give the geyser its name. The boardwalk around Echinus Geyser contains several benches and multiple tiers of platforms. Visitors to the geyser during most of the 21st century might have wondered why there were so many viewing areas, because eruptions are not common. But in the latter half of the 20th century, the geyser was a consistent performer, and visitors could get closer to an eruption there than almost anywhere in the park! The geyser appears to have been mostly dormant with only occasional eruptions prior to 1948. In the 1970s Echinus Geyser was erupting regularly at 40–80-minute intervals. In the 1980s and 1990s, the eruption durations could be quite extreme, sometimes lasting more than 90 minutes! Eruptions of Echinus Geyser varied tremendously when the geyser was vigorously active. Some were small while others reached about 23 meters (75 feet). They could be vertical or inclined, occasionally soaking onlookers with warm water, and could be regular enough that the park would sometimes post predictions—the duration of an eruption could often be used to forecast the timing of the subsequent eruption. By the early 2000s, however, eruptions started to wane, and activity became much less common. In 2010, a temperature monitoring system was established in the outflow channel of Echinus Geyser as a means of tracking any changes. Data from that system recorded 15 sporadic eruptions during October 2010–January 2011. After that time there were a few eruptions here and there until the geyser came alive in 2017. Media Sources/Usage: Public Domain. View Media Details Temperature record from Echinus geyser outflow channel for October 17–20, 2017. The plot captures a time when the geyser went from occasional eruptions to semi-regular eruptions (signified by temperature spikes after about 12:00 on October 18) occurring about every 2 hours. Media Sources/Usage: Some content may have restrictions. View Media Details Echinus Geyser in eruption on October 24, 2017. Photo by MA Bellingham, used with permission. Starting in mid-September of that year, the temperature sensor recorded spikes followed by decreases happening many times throughout the day. These were associated not with eruptions but rather surges from the pool where the surface became agitated, releasing hot water down the channel, and then calming, with lower water levels that gradually returned to normal. In October, true eruptions started, indicated by higher temperature spikes as more hot water went down the channel. From October 18 to November 10, 2017, eruptions took place very consistently about every 2–3 hours. Then the activity suddenly stopped. There was one eruption in January 2018, one in January 2019, and two in December 2020. Then quiet. Until now. In early February 2026, repeated surges of the geyser began—as before, with the surface becoming agitated and releasing more water down the runoff channel. The first eruption since 2020 occurred on February 7, followed by additional eruptions on February 9, 12, and 15. Starting on February 16, eruptions began occurring every 2 to 5 hours. These eruptions last 2–3 minutes and reach about 6–10 meters (20–30 feet) in height. After eruption, the water level decreases significantly and doesn’t return to normal for about an hour. Overall, this pattern resembles that of late 2017. Media Sources/Usage: Public Domain. View Media Details Temperature record from Echinus Geyser outflow channel for February 6, 2026, at 8 p.m. MST to February 7, 2026, at 8 a.m. MST. The plot shows initial baseline temperatures, then two spikes to 50 °C representing water surges, then an eruption marked by a spike to 70 °C followed by a lull to 10 °C, and finally a return to baseline. Another surge is present at the end of the record. The eruption shown is the first recorded at the geyser since December 2020. You can follow the activity of Echinus Geyser via the temperature graphs on the Yellowstone Volcano Observatory website —look for the spikes that reach about 70 °C (158 °F). Those are the eruptions! Spikes that reach 40–50 °C (104–122 °F) are the surges. Will the eruptions continue into the summertime, allowing visitors to use the seating and viewing areas around the geyser for their intended purpose? It’s probably not too likely given the geyser’s tendency to wake up for a month or two before going back to sleep, and there were no eruptions during the last few days of February so it might already have gone quiet. But change is constant at Norris Geyser Basin, so perhaps the show will continue into the summer! Fingers crossed… Acknowledgement : Some of the information for this article was derived from T. Scott Bryan’s The Geysers of Yellowstone , Lee H. Whittlesey’s Yellowstone Place Names , the online GeyserTimes database for Echinus Geyser , U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1456 , and research by M.A. Bellingham. Related Science News November 9, 2023 Taking the Temperature of Norris Geyser Basin In 2003, activity in the Norris Geyser Basin increased and scientists logged higher ground temperatures and witnessed a greater number of geyser eruptions. In order to better understand the hydrothermal system at Yellowstone, a temporary network of monitoring equipment was installed, which was eventually followed by the installation of a more robust network. By Yellowstone Volcano Observatory , Yellowstone Taking the Temperature of Norris Geyser Basin November 9, 2023 Taking the Temperature of Norris Geyser Basin In 2003, activity in the Norris Geyser Basin increased and scientists logged higher ground temperatures and witnessed a greater number of geyser eruptions. In order to better understand the hydrothermal system at Yellowstone, a temporary network of monitoring equipment was installed, which was eventually followed by the installation of a more robust network. Learn More November 7, 2023 Water Temperature Data for Echinus Geyser, Yellowstone National Park Echinus geyser exhibits irregular behavior, sometimes erupting regularly for months, and then ceasing altogether. By Yellowstone Volcano Observatory , Yellowstone Water Temperature Data for Echinus Geyser, Yellowstone National Park November 7, 2023 Water Temperature Data for Echinus Geyser, Yellowstone National Park Echinus geyser exhibits irregular behavior, sometimes erupting regularly for months, and then ceasing altogether. Learn More A tour of Norris Geyser Basin’s backcountry thermal areas November 25, 2024 A tour of Norris Geyser Basin’s backcountry thermal areas Norris Geyser Basin is the hottest on-land geyser basin within Yellowstone National Park, with a wide diversity of thermal feature chemistry and... Read Article Where do acid-sulfate hot springs come from and why are they important? January 17, 2021 Where do acid-sulfate hot springs come from and why are they important? Yellowstone hosts thousands of thermal features which have diverse chemistries and origins. The most iconic features, like Old Faithful, have neutral... Read Article Why do most geyser- and sinter-producing hot springs have alkaline (basic) pH? August 16, 2020 Why do most geyser- and sinter-producing hot springs have alkaline (basic) pH? It’s a common misconception that all geysers and hot springs in Yellowstone are acidic. Some are, but the water that comes out of many of Yellowstone... Read Article The Norris temperature network—a unique system for monitoring Yellowstone's thermal features August 20, 2018 The Norris temperature network—a unique system for monitoring Yellowstone's thermal features Norris Geyser Basin is one of the most dynamic geyser basins in Yellowstone National Park. It frequently experiences "disturbances" when thermal... Read Article Recent water eruptions at Steamboat Geyser April 30, 2018 Recent water e
