---
id: 610
url: https://www.bostonglobe.com/2024/11/11/metro/fall-river-donald-trump-victory-2024-election-economic-anxiety/
title: For a century, Fall River voted Democrat. Then it went for Trump.
domain: www.bostonglobe.com
source_date: '2025-01-31'
tags:
- news
- politics
summary: Fall River, Massachusetts—a Democratic stronghold for a century—voted for
  Donald Trump in 2024, marking the first Republican presidential victory in the city
  since Calvin Coolidge in 1924. This dramatic shift reflects deep economic anxiety
  among residents, who cited inflation, rising housing costs, and immigration concerns
  as primary motivations, with voters hoping Trump could address these "bread-and-butter
  issues." The reversal is part of a broader Republican surge across the South Coast
  region and reflects changing demographics, including a growing Latino population
  and working-class frustration with Democratic leadership on economic matters.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# For a century, Fall River voted Democrat. Then it went for Trump.

FALL RIVER — In 2012, this post-industrial city voted like many of Massachusetts’ urban Democratic strongholds, with three of every four voters casting a ballot for then-President Barack Obama. Legislative incumbents cruised to reelection in both the city and nearby towns. Half of Fall River’s registered voters were Democrats themselves. That blue bastion is now something else: Trump country. Former president Donald Trump’s victory last week in Fall River was the first for a GOP presidential candidate since Calvin Coolidge exactly a century ago and just one of several on the South Coast, helping add to Republicans’ unexpected gains around New England. That sudden right turn in the results exposed what residents and officials say has been a long-gestating shift in communities on Cape Cod’s doorstep. The growing economic frustration that helped lift Trump around the country is felt acutely in Fall River, one of the state’s poorest cities and one where the electorate is shifting, too. In interviews with the Globe, voters described feeling overwhelmed by inflation and rising housing prices, and hoping — some say knowing — that Trump will help ease the economic pain. Get Rhode Map A weekday briefing from veteran Rhode Island reporters, focused on the things that matter most in the Ocean State. Enter Email Sign Up “This is the man that can help us. And he will help us,” said Victorino Chaves, a 59-year-old Republican from Fall River who said he voted for President Biden four years ago to “give him a chance” but felt he ultimately did “nothing,” including to help stem the flow of undocumented immigrants into the country. FEATURED VIDEO Related : Even in usually blue New England, Trump made significant gains. What happened? “Then it seems like they’re helping them before they’re helping us,” Chaves said of elected officials. “I think [Trump] will do something. I know he will.” Republican gains weren’t limited to one city. Justin Thurber, a GOP challenger to a long-time Democratic incumbent, won his state representative race in neighboring Somerset, another South Coast community that Trump flipped. Trump for the first time in three elections took nearby Westport, the hometown of the state Senate’s powerful Democratic budget chief. He also increased his share of votes across the region, whether it was towns he won in 2020 or in New Bedford, another Democratic stronghold where he lost but carved out 45 percent of the vote last week. It’s Fall River, however, that experienced the starkest shift, with Trump cracking 50 percent of the vote after losing the city by 12 percentage points in 2020. The victory was historic, too, a Globe review of election results found: The last Republican presidential candidate to take the city was Coolidge, a former Massachusetts governor, in 1924. Advertisement “This switch has been going on for 10 years,” said Paul Coogan, Fall River’s third-term mayor and a Democrat. “It’s a constant drumbeat of the bread-and-butter issues. [Voters] want lower costs. They want to pay less money for insurance, less money for food, less money for gasoline. They listened to Trump’s message and they were able to look past all the craziness and focus on that.” Many in Fall River feel that economic anxiety more than most. Once a major textile manufacturer, the city has a median household income of less than $53,000, one of the lowest in the state and three times less than Newton, a wealthy Boston suburb where the median sale price for a home last year neared $1.7 million. Newton sits at the opposite end of the same congressional district. Related : Trump’s economy was good for New England before. Now there are big concerns. Melyssa Nogueira, a 20-year-old pre-law student at Roger Williams University and first-time voter, said it was squarely economic concerns that tipped her vote for Trump. “I’m planning on owning a home, so being able to afford things in my future is just definitely a big concern for me,” said Nogueira, who described herself as a right-leaning independent who remembered the economy being better during Trump’s first term. “Just being able to afford things [was] a lot easier,” she said. Melyssa Nogueira, a first-time voter, posed for a portrait in Fall River. Jessica Rinaldi/Globe Staff Jefferson Moises, 52, a naturalized American from Brazil who runs an auto repair business in Fall River, said all costs are rising, whether it’s for food or to maintain a car. A registered independent, he said he voted for Trump. “I live in this country 25 years,” he said. “I’ve never seen [it] so bad.” Like elsewhere in Massachusetts, there’s a dearth of affordable homes in Fall River, straining an already tight housing market. More than 60 percent of households in the city are renters, said Judith Liben, a housing attorney at the Massachusetts Law Reform Institute, and their costs have been rising sharply, too. Advertisement Median rent for a home in the city is $1,700 as of Monday, up 13 percent from a year ago, according to real estate platform Zumper.com . ”There is indeed a critical crisis right now, especially for renters, and it’s worse than ever. So, yes, people are angry and frustrated and looking for solutions,” Liben said. The city’s changing demographics may have also played a role. Fall River has one of the country’s highest concentrations of Portuguese Americans, but its Latino population has also doubled since 2010. Latinos now account for 13 percent of the city’s largely white, working-class population — two cohorts that Trump particularly appealed to in Massachusetts and beyond. Related : ‘He changed my mind’: In decisive victory, Donald Trump builds a new coalition That doesn’t make Fall River that much different than other previously Democratic pockets that turned to Trump this year, said Doug Roscoe, a University of Massachusetts Dartmouth political science professor. “You have the economic sensibility, and you have a big and growing Latino population. That explains why this region” leaned so heavily toward Trump, he said. The growing number of Latinos may have had another affect, said Coogan, the city’s mayor: Among the Portuguese Americans who “came quote legally” to the United States, they view a changing city as an attack on what they know. “In people’s minds, they’re being forced out by illegal immigrants,” he said. “They’re very much hometown people, and Fall River is their hometown. If they had their way, they would keep Fall River the same, prominently Portuguese.” To be sure, Democrats still hold many elected offices in Fall River and beyond on the South Coast. While the share of Democratic voters has steadily dropped in Fall River and elsewhere in Massachusetts , two of the city’s state representatives are Democrats who won reelection without an opponent this year. Ditto for its state Senator Michael Rodrigues, a Westport Democrat and its congressman, Jake Auchincloss. Senator Elizabeth Warren also won Fall River in her own reelection bid, with 52 percent of the vote. Advertisement Unofficial results show Steven Ouellette, a Westport Democrat, also eked out a win for an open state representative seat that covers parts of Fall River and New Bedford, as well as Acushnet, the community where Trump performed best in Massachusetts . His Republican challenger has said he would seek a recount . The decline of Democratic dominance at the top of the ticket, however, has been years in the making. Since Obama’s reelection victory in 2012, Democrats’ margin of victory steadily shrunk with each subsequent presidential election. Hillary Clinton got 58 percent of the vote followed by President Biden earning 55 percent in 2020, before the city outright flipped last week, when Trump prevailed with just 47 percent of the city’s registered voters casting a ballot. Sarah Custadio, 33, a stay-at-home mother who was out on a walk on a recent afternoon in Fall River with her 10-month-old baby, said she backed Harris because she considered her “a lesser of two evils.” But she cast her ballot feeling unsure about Harris’ ability to deliver on the economy. “The economy is just a crap show right now,” Custadio said. The fallout has left South Coast Democrats, like many around the country, searching for their own answers. State Representative Alan Silvia, a moderate Fall River Democrat, said he’s long warned others in his party that it’s shifted “too far to the left” and focused too often on social issues. Trump’s win, he said, “shows a sign of things to come.” ”We have to focus on those issues that really mean most to people , ” Silvia said. “ It’s a big wake-up call.” Matt Stout can be reached at matt.stout@globe.com . Follow him @mattpstout . Omar Mohammed can be reached at omar.mohammed@globe.com . Follow him on Twitter (X) @shurufu .
