---
id: 572
url: https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/canyon-of-the-ancestors-180985955/
title: For Centuries, Indigenous People Lived in These Desert Canyons. Now, New Technology
  Reveals Extraordinary Details About This Sacred Site
domain: www.smithsonianmag.com
source_date: '2025-02-18'
tags:
- news
- academic-paper
summary: Tse Yaa Kin (the "House Under the Rock") in Canyon de Chelly National Monument
  is a sacred Indigenous site containing 165+ rooms built between A.D. 300-1300 that
  was abandoned around the 13th century, likely due to drought. A team of researchers
  led by the National Park Service and University of New Mexico has recently begun
  the first comprehensive archaeological and architectural survey using advanced technology
  like lidar and electron microscopy to map the complex, study its decorative earthen
  plasters, and identify which portions are most vulnerable to erosion and climate
  threats. The research aims to better understand the ancestral peoples who lived
  there while also protecting this spiritually significant site for contemporary Indigenous
  communities.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# For Centuries, Indigenous People Lived in These Desert Canyons. Now, New Technology Reveals Extraordinary Details About This Sacred Site

A view of Tse Yaa Kin’s central tower complex, constructed around the end of the 13th century A.D. Wayne Martin Belger The Canyon de Chelly National Monument , on the Navajo Nation in northeastern Arizona, encompasses 83,000-odd acres of sandstone peaks and plateaus towering above waterways dotted with pines, junipers, aspens and cottonwoods. Viewed from the sky, the canyon takes the shape of a turkey’s foot—fitting, since wild turkeys have lived here for centuries. The area’s best-known formation may be Spider Rock, a red sandstone dagger stabbing 750 feet up into the Southwestern sky. But perhaps its greatest and most mysterious feature is a vast complex of 165 or more rooms, some hewn by the Indigenous peoples who have lived here for more than a thousand years, drawn by fertile soil fed by springs and streams, abundant wild game, and natural protection from the elements. A view of Tse Yaa Kin from one of the alluvial terraces southwest of the site. In the foreground are piñon pines and junipers; in their day, the beams jutting from the tall tower likely supported balconies. Wayne Martin Belger Right, a detail of the turkey-foot shape of Canyon de Chelly National Monument, home to the sacred site of Tse Yaa Kin. 5W Infographics To their successors, the Navajo, or Diné, this most sacred complex is known as Tse Yaa Kin, the House Under the Rock—a place of deep reverence for the remnants of an ancestral culture. On a hot September day, I joined a scientific mission to the site. Though I’m Diné myself, this was my first visit. And I had some trepidation, because to many Indigenous people, Tse Yaa Kin, known also as Mummy Cave, is a holy site considered off-limits. To cross the sandy wash from the southwest requires four-wheel drive; when a truck gets stuck in the mud or the sandy soil, you use a winch to tow it out. Now and then, feral horses emerged from the cottonwood trees. As the road unfurled, it revealed peach orchards and cornfields ready for the harvest. Ancient Native homesteads and cultural sites, including the famous White House Cliff Dwellings, popped into view, then receded as I moved deeper into the canyon, accompanied by Josh Ramsey, a veteran National Park Service (NPS) archaeologist. After two hours, Tse Yaa Kin appeared around the bend, its alcoves offering tantalizing shelter from the September sun. People inhabited this land more than 4,000 years ago, but the human-made structures date to between A.D. 300 and 1300, when a series of Native groups built and occupied a small city’s worth of homes, meeting houses and places of worship in these cliffs. Starting more than 1,000 years ago, the inhabitants adorned the walls of the complex with decorative earthen plasters in white and occasionally green. At the center of the complex is the most elevated room, which Diné and other tribes consider the holiest spot in this remarkable site. Subscribe to Smithsonian magazine now for just $19.99 This article is a selection from the March 2025 issue of Smithsonian magazine Subscribe A view from one of Tse Yaa Kin’s caves opens onto the rich valley of Canyon del Muerto to the south, where the earth provided ideal conditions for cultivating corn, squash, beans, cotton and more throughout the past millennium. Wayne Martin Belger Ancestral Puebloan structures inside Tse Yaa Kin, dating from the 12th and 13th centuries A.D., include a prominent kiva—the round gathering space on the right. Wayne Martin Belger Suddenly, around the 13th century, all the inhabitants left, most likely fleeing a drought, geologists say; through the succeeding centuries, the natural caves protected many of the constructed dwellings inside. In 1882, Colonel James Stevenson , pursuing ethnographic work on behalf of the Smithsonian Institution, led the first team of Western archaeologists to this site, where he found two sets of human remains, wrapped in yucca cordage, which had been preserved through desiccation. Stevenson’s team quickly dubbed the site the “Mummy Cave,” which is how it’s still widely known. Ever since, anthropologists and archaeologists have come here to study the remarkable history contained in these caves. Yet until now, scholars have never done a full archaeological and architectural survey of the site. Tse Yaa Kin remains a powerful place to many Indigenous people who live in the canyon and throughout the Southwest. But in recent years, it’s become clear that the canyon’s natural ecosystems, like its cultural sites, are threatened by invasive species, erosion and the impacts of a changing climate. Since 2022, a group of 15 researchers and students led by Ramsey of the NPS and Angelyn Bass , an anthropologist at the University of New Mexico, has been surveying the entirety of Tse Yaa Kin—hiking, climbing and occasionally rappelling down the steep walls of sandstone. Using digital photography and the remote sensing method known as lidar, the researchers aim to map the complex for the first time, in part to determine which portions are most vulnerable to decay, and therefore most in need of protection. (Eventually, the team could recommend some structural stabilizing work, perhaps including the central tower complex.) And by submitting those precious plasters to electron microscopy, they are learning about their composition and the people who lived within these walls centuries ago. As I approached Tse Yaa Kin in a truck, accompanied by Ramsey, the research team came into view: little dots in the distance, buzzing to and fro among the sacred alcoves, near where Ramsey, Bass and other researchers had pitched their makeshift camps. Their work is both hard and delicate: They climb up the canyon’s walls with their backpacks full of tools and gently collect flakes of fallen plasters from the ground, to study the fine finish that has preserved them. “All that’s left that is expressive of the people who lived here are the plasters,” Bass said, pointing to the handprints and fingerprints left in these decorative touches. The plasters, Bass argued, bring us closer to these ancestors: “They have a voice.” The view as our photographer ascends the anchored ropes and portable ladders that allow team members in climbing harnesses to haul gear and equipment. NPS archaeologist Josh Ramsey looks on from above. Wayne Martin Belger The team’s lidar globes serve as reference points to combine visual data from multiple scans of the site into a composite 3D model. The results help researchers complete their structural and geotechnical modeling and analysis. Wayne Martin Belger Ramsey, an archaeologist with the NPS for 15 years, sits by the kiva, facing east. Besides his research duties, “It’s also my obligation to protect the rights of Navajo people,” he says. Wayne Martin Belger Over the next two days, I watched the researchers work and spent time with them over meals by the camping stove, which sat among junipers and piñons along the banks of a wash. On the third day, threats of monsoonal rains cut short my trip, and the researchers sought refuge outside the canyon, their important work interrupted by the intensifying weather of climate change—the same force that threatens these caves. Bass, whose academic background is in art history and historic preservation, was clearly excited to examine the complex’s architectural and design elements in detail. She is especially fascinated by the earthen plasters, an ancient art form she’s been studying for 30 years. She recalled an episode from when she was around 20 and working as an interpreter at Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado, on a day when the site had no visitors. Bass sat in one of the park’s ancient alcoves and watched a conservator working on “a beautiful plaster that had bighorn sheep going across it,” she said. “And I knew then that’s what I wanted to do.” The decorative plasters are just one element attesting to the history of the people who have lived here. Artifacts, including tools, and rock art depicting hunters, antelopes, goats and more tell the story of the Archaic people, who inhabited these lands from 2500 B.C. to 200 B.C. The baskets found throughout the cave complex—preserved all this time with help from the dry air—remind visitors that the Basketmaker people built elegant, complex public spaces in these canyon walls between 200 B.C. and A.D. 750. And the Ancestral Pueblo people, who dwelled here between A.D. 750 and 1300, were also sophisticated builders. The Hopi farmed in the valley seasonally from the 1300s to the 1600s, and the Hopi and the Pueblos still maintain their ties to the site today. Since the early 1700s, the Diné people have lived in the canyon, where they farm and herd sheep and goats through fields, sometimes sheltering herds within the ghostly complex. For the Diné, the canyon was a stronghold against the westward expansion of the U.S. government in the early and mid-1800s. Then, in the 1860s, one of the most tragic episodes in Diné history occurred here, when the American government successfully besieged the Diné right where I stood with Bass and her team. Some historians describe this siege as the defining moment in a genocidal campaign that forced thousands of Diné people to march hundreds of miles, at gunpoint, from their homelands here in Arizona to Hweeldi, or Fort Sumner, in present-day New Mexico. Along the way, hundreds died; government forces, meanwhile, destroyed our cornfields and peach orchards and slaughtered our livestock. We Diné refer to this forced relocation as the “ The Long Walk .” Though around 40 families live within the limits of the monument today, for many, the displacement remains an open wound. Wall paintings, likely dating to the 13th century, inside Tse Yaa Kin. Archaeologists have found similar patterns replicated in sandals, textiles and ceramic vessels in the area. Wayne Martin Belger A platinum palladium print of a section of Tse Yaa Kin known as the “East House” or “East Alcove.” Photographer Wayne Martin Belger (pictu
