---
id: 568
url: https://www.holloway.com/b/great-founders-write
title: 'Great Founders Write: Principles for Clear Thinking, Confident Writing, and
  Startup Success &mdash; Holloway'
domain: www.holloway.com
source_date: '2025-02-23'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- tutorial
summary: '"Great Founders Write" is a book and online course by Ben Putano that teaches
  entrepreneurs how to develop clear writing and communication skills as essential
  tools for startup success. The resource emphasizes that writing is fundamental for
  thinking clearly, leading teams, building influence, and competing in today''s knowledge-driven
  economy, providing practical frameworks, exercises, and templates organized around
  four principles: writing with purpose, empathy, clarity, and courage. For $49, readers
  gain lifetime access to the 140-page interactive book, an 8-part video course, and
  supplemental templates—with testimonials from successful founders crediting the
  material with improving both their business communication and personal growth.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Great Founders Write: Principles for Clear Thinking, Confident Writing, and Startup Success &mdash; Holloway

Clear writing, clear thinking, startup success. Entrepreneurs compete on an increasingly crowded, global level. It’s not enough to have a great idea, product, or business model — you need to tell your story. Get concrete, step by step instructions on how to improve your writing, communication, and leadership. This special Holloway edition provides a comprehensive toolkit, including an on-demand writing course. The entire online book Strategic Writing Course ($89 value) Additional Digital Training ebook 20+ templates and supplemental material Lifetime digital access Advanced search, bookmarking, future updates, and more through the Holloway Reader $49 Buy ► Read Preview ► Why read on Holloway? I never considered myself a writer, but Ben helped me turn my two decades of startup experience into a book I'm incredibly proud of. I'm a better founder because of it. Andrew Warner ( entrepreneur and host of the hit startup podcast, Mixergy ) Great Founders Write Principles for Clear Thinking, Confident Writing, and Startup Success by Ben Putano Accelerate Your Business, Career and Personal Growth Why do we get stuck in our own heads? Why do we struggle to share our vision and ideas? Why does growth seem to come so easily to some, but not to us? ‍ What is holding us back from building the business, career, and life of our dreams? ‍ The secret to entrepreneurial success has not changed in millennia. But today, it’s more important than ever: ‍ Great founders write. Writing is the ultimate accelerator for clear thinking, communication, leadership, and personal growth. It’s the tool used by world-changing founders from Benjamin Franklin to Oprah Winfrey to Jeff Bezos and countless more.‍ “Clear thinking is clear writing. One cannot exist without the other.” –William Zinsser In today’s knowledge-driven economy, ideas are your most valuable currency. The new rich are those who can communicate clearly and build a loyal following. That’s why writing is the most important skill and habit for founders to develop. ‍ Are you ready to unlock your full potential, grow your influence, and lead your business to new heights? It’s time to join the ranks of great founders. It’s time to write.‍ Great Founders Write will teach you how to: Write clearly for teammates, customers & investors Communicate your vision and ideas with confidence Build an online audience by telling stories that stick Accelerate your personal growth and learning You’ll also get: A library of writing exercises, guides, and frameworks you can use to become a better writer TODAY. Access to an an 8-part video course on copywriting, storytelling, and more. Table of Contents Part I Write with Purpose Begin with the End in Mind Read Preview Say the Most Important Thing First Sell With Storytelling Train Your Team For Success Part II Write with Empathy Kill Your Ego, Replace With Empathy Read Preview Know Thy Reader Find The Win-Win Opportunity Nurture Key Relationships Part III Write with Clarity Make Every Word Count Read Preview Simplify Never Skip Editing Design for Easy Reading Part IV Write with Courage Lead from The Front Read Preview Build Your Audience Practice, Practice, Practice Postscript: The Work Has Just Begun Acknowledgments About the Author Get lifetime access now. The full book, interactive and searchable. Plus all future updates. Instant lifetime access $49 140 -page online book Strategic Writing Course ($89 value) Additional Digital Training ebook 20+ templates and supplemental material Lifetime digital access Advanced search, bookmarking, future updates, and more through the Holloway Reader Buy ► A Timeless Skill That’s More Relevant Than Ever Great founders write because… ‍ Writing is your primary means of communication. With remote teams, international partners, and a global customer base, we’re spending less time in the same room with the people we work with. Written communication skills have never been more valuable. Your competition is fierce and well-spoken. Traditional barriers to entry are gone. You aren’t just competing for wallet share, but also mind share. Ideas are just as important as products and services. Adaptability is the #1 trait of successful founders. The world is changing faster than ever. Writing is the ultimate personal development tool to improve your strategy, learn new skills, and become your best self. Writing is the master key that unlocks everything else. Great founders write to learn from the past, lead in the present, and create the future. Great Founders Write will give you the principles and practical exercises for better writing in your career and life. About the Author Ben Putano Damn Gravity Media Ben Putano is a writer, entrepreneur, and book publisher. He’s the founder of Damn Gravity Media, a publishing house that inspires and educates tomorrow’s great founders. Ben lives in Chicago with his wife, Mary, and is an avid ultimate frisbee player. What People Are Saying About the Book and Writing Course Sara Loretta I got more out of Great Founders Write than I did from a $17k coaching program. Molly at Goblinapp.com Are you a founder? You need to sign up for this writing cohort today. Blogging has literally built my business, brought in clients and people, and you’ll learn a lot about yourself too. (My tweet was generated as I loved Ben’s cohort and posted it 8x in a week!) Aleksandar @itsbalal Amazing story about creators’ vulnerabilities. Last year I bought Ben’s book and from what I can say - it’s maybe the best book about writing that I have read. No fluff, just hit the mark.✨ Espree Devora Ben and Grant offer kind care. This is a significant cohort based on elementary steps for writing. Learning how to write with heart goes a long way. Vineet Sinha @VineetSinha Loving the ideas in Great Founders Write by @BenjaminPutano. As someone with big dreams who struggles with writing, this book has lots of actionable ideas. It is a great reference. I highly recommend it. I’m a CTO and founder who has struggled with writing. I joined GFW because I wanted to work on expressing my ideas better. Now, I’ve had to stop and reflect on the work I’m doing, but would love to go to the next cohort and continue to share the path forward. Andrew Warner I just bought Great Founders Write. Ben published my book, and when he did, he said I need to be more vulnerable, but I kept pushing back. Now I see how important it is to connect with readers emotionally. Christina Bowen I'm taking a #greatfounderswrite course from GFW right now and finding a lot of clear, actionable things I can do! I’m not a nerdy or abstract or structural thinker but it's really helpful to map out my personality to a person who writes coherently for other humans. Recommended! Tobias Günther If you want to improve your writing as a founder (which you should!), following @BenjaminPutano is a great start. John Paul Hernandez @hellojohnpaul I’m already enjoying the just-published Great Founders Write by @BenjaminPutano. Rarely do I read a book that I can implement on day one. Valuable tenants on writing that anyone can use. Paul Doerwald I’m Paul Doerwald, CEO and Founder of Clockk, a “timesheets done for you” tool. I joined GFW because I am a Founder, and I wanted to build a discipline of writing. I just started using Twitter and within days, Ben’s brilliantly focused marketing reached me. I wanted to learn writing + distribution from someone who was obviously a master. My biggest takeaway is the wonderful community that Ben curates. Meeting other people in the cohort, reading their work and having them read mine, has been an absolute pleasure. I am sad that with the cohort done I won’t have the same reason to keep in touch with these people. This cohort is perfect for founders who need a push out of their comfort zone to start writing. There is no room for excuses. Even if you don't know what to say, say it anyway. And then magic happens. George Siosi Samuels @GeorgeSiosi @WendyThePoohMN @dickiebush @ship30for30 And then I would recommend @BenjaminPutano’s “Great Founders Write” cohort if you want to go to the next level! Dylan Redekop || Newsletter Strategist @growthcurrency @5harath Highly recommend @BenjaminPutano & @grant_nissily’s Great Founders Write cohort.Great pride, great community, tons of learning and resources. Jason Shen @JasonShen I’m psyched for # GreatFoundersWrite because I’ll be: Connecting with writer/founders, Expanding on my threads from # ship30for30, Publishing chapters of my guide to pivoting Jeremy Ginn (Papa J) @jwginn Today was incredible. I got to spend an hour with @BanjaminPutano and several amazing peoplle including @goblin_tech_ in the Great Founders Write cohort. I got my money’s worth in the session today alone! Devin Faddoul After I started my financial planning firm, I joined GFW thinking I would just learn how to hone my writing skills. But it was so much more than that. Ben is not only a great teacher, but he’s built and incredible community of founders, people that I hope to be able to call friends for life. Suzanne H The Great Founders Write cohort was a great experience. The structure and community provided me with the support (and accountability) to consistently publish content that will help grow my business. Paul Becker @Paul_Becker_ Glad to be part of it! Great initiative @BenjaminPutano: Highly recommended for founders who want to find their voice and have confidence in a process to execute it. Draymond Washington @DrayDrayW When you aren't good at something, find something that will help make you better. Learning some good tools in @BenjaminPutano # GreatFoundersWrite course. In honor of Juneteenth my first writing is centered around my life as a black man. Thoughts? draymond.substack.com/p/the-power-of-being-black Meenu Susanna I highly recommend the course to others who want to get better at writing. The tools and models are insightful. The best part has been Ben’s infectious high energy and positivity and kindness. Ben
