---
id: 403
url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=44189391
title: How to get started with writing tech video essays | Hacker News
domain: news.ycombinator.com
source_date: '2025-06-09'
tags:
- video
- tutorial
- web-dev
summary: 'This Hacker News discussion focuses on getting started with tech video essays
  on YouTube. Key takeaways include: (1) **Content quality matters more than production
  polish** — successful channels like CoreDumpped use minimal music and AI voiceovers
  but succeed through substantive insights, while clear speech and no distracting
  audio is especially important since viewers often watch at higher speeds; and (2)
  **Just start creating** — the most important advice is to overcome perfectionism
  and publish your first videos despite their rough quality, as hands-on experience
  and iterating through multiple attempts is more valuable than endless planning and
  research.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# How to get started with writing tech video essays | Hacker News

Hacker News new | past | comments | ask | show | jobs | submit login How to get started with writing tech video essays 90 points by sonderotis 7 months ago | hide | past | favorite | 26 comments I am thinking about starting my own YouTube channel that focuses on video essays on software technology like languages or software tools. For example an essay on the computer terminal. For all of you who have tech YouTube channels how do I set up for good content material and make my videos interesting and where can I find royalty free music and clips. jasode 7 months ago | next [–] >and make my videos interesting and where can I find royalty free music and clips. reply to commenter akulbe: >Do you think using AI for text-to-speech lessens the value of the content? You really don't need any music soundtracks or B-roll stock-footage clips to make compelling tech content. Another problem with music is that most content creators mix it too loud which is distracting and often drowns out the voiceover and makes words unintelligible. E.g. this (relatively new) channel about computer hardware and programming uses no music and no B-roll cuts with a AI generated voice ("Dylan" voice from ElevenLabs) and yet the quality of content allowed it to amass ~275k subscribers in less than 18 months : https://www.youtube.com/@CoreDumpped/videos An AI gen voice is not usually ideal but it will be accepted by audiences if the native accent makes the English pronunciation too difficult for viewers to understand -- and the insights from the content itself are high quality . The content creator in the above example is from Ecuador and he said his native English voice is not good. Ben Krasnow's "Applied Science" is another successful channel without music and no stock footage clips: https://www.youtube.com/c/AppliedScience/videos slyall 7 months ago | parent | next [–] Many people also watch videos speed up. So clear speech and no music is even more important to them. If you content doesn't depend on visuals also consider releasing episodes as podcasts. hardwaregeek 7 months ago | prev | next [–] Check out this video: [1]. It's one of my favorite videos on YouTube. It covers instructional design from a YouTube perspective in a thorough, thoughtful manner. [1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aBUy0z5HNlY testycool 7 months ago | parent | next [–] +1 for these types of videos from Internet Shaquille foxfired 7 months ago | prev | next [–] There are some good advice here, particularly the "Shaquille" video. But one thing I want to add is that no amount of advice can help you when all you have is a blank piece of paper. I don't mean this in a negative way. Tips and tricks are great when you have a working machine you want to improve. But when you are getting started, do it a hundred times, or until you figure it out. For videos, you have to get all your bad videos out of the way so you can start making good ones. akulbe 7 months ago | parent | next [–] Do you think using AI for text-to-speech lessens the value of the content? I can't speak in a normal voice anymore, after being on a ventilator. I'm just wondering... if the content is useful, but oh no it's AI talking... detracts from it? I thought about putting an intro in my normal "speaking" voice, so people would understand why. lawik 7 months ago | root | parent | next [–] AI voice will detract because voice is very important in video. Especially in essays. And AI voices are very common for low effort slop video so it would not be novel. But it is not necessarily a dealbreaker. Good research, good writing, funny timing, great editing. All of these can elevate the whole. Or being exceptional at one or two can compensate for missing one. CGP Gray does well without a face and started with terrible animation. Catagris 7 months ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] Sorry to say but if I hear an AI voice I close the video. Too much spam/slop does the same thing. Maybe hire or partner with a voice actor or friend? em-bee 7 months ago | root | parent | next [–] i generally do too. but on the other hand hiring a voice actor is cost prohibitive for someone just starting out and even asking a friend will multiply the amount of effort unless you want to do this as equal partners where the better speaker simply gets more airtime and the other does more of the research. as an alternative maybe it helps to explain the reason up front. not being able to speak is a good excuse and i wouldn't want to miss out on good material just because the creator has no voice. for someone who is simply not speaking english well enough, practice and get better. as an alternative, record the video in your native language and offer the computer voice in english as a second audio track. then we can tell the difference from AI slop. brudgers 7 months ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] Approximately nobody likes the sound of their own voice. And approximately nobody sounds like a voice actor. And most importantly, your audience won’t care because it will be your audience. I mean people listened to Stephen Hawking’s voice. shortrounddev2 7 months ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] As soon as I realize that there's any AI-generated aspect of the video, I stop watching the video akulbe 7 months ago | root | parent | next [–] That's a bummer. This is why I use AI. https://youtu.be/8gFa36nCwoU phrotoma 7 months ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] Same. Major turnoff. sebnun 7 months ago | prev | next [–] I started a software Youtube channel 2 days ago [1], so I went down the rabbit hole of finding the best tools, best way to record, etc. I first thought of using a presentation tool like keynote, but it can be limiting if you want to make more complex content, like showing browser tabs, drawing diagrams, etc. If your content is more technical, I think is best to just record your screen and show the command line or editor. Most people use OBS to record the screen and show your face at the same time. You can explain things with a diagram tool like excalidraw. Theprimeagen and "Theo - t3․gg" work that way, they first make a live stream, then edit that stream into a Youtube video. > where can I find royalty free music and clips If your content is more "infotainment" like Fireship, he explains his way of making videos here [2] and this video also goes into his process more [3] [1] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F_WM0lJU6GY [2] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6-Q2dgodLs [3] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XRoSBWYMefY schneems 7 months ago | prev | next [–] There are entire subreddits dedicated to producing content. Beyond that: to make good food, eat good food. Spend time watching N hours of tech YouTube and take notes on which you liked and which you didn’t. For the ones you liked make notes of why and try to replicate that (tone, storytelling technique etc.) and for the ones you liked less, find things to avoid or do less of. rickcarlino 7 months ago | parent | next [–] What are your favorite subreddits in this area? I feel foolish saying this, but I had not even considered that there would be a sub devoted to this. ednite 7 months ago | prev | next [–] This hits home. Before I published my first blog and video, I was doing everything except creating. I was procrastinating, researching, overthinking. YouTube is full of tutorials that can help you get started, but the real shift for me happened when I stopped planning and just hit publish. My first video is rough and super amateur, but putting it out there felt empowering. It made me want to keep going. I’m no expert, but one thing’s clear is that you only get better by doing. Tutorials help, but nothing beats hands-on learning. In my case, I’ve always liked Casey Neistat’s raw, authentic style. I’m still working up the nerve to get in front of the camera more, but I know I’ll get there. I know my comment might sound a bit off-topic since you’re asking about the technical “how-to”, but that’s kind of my point. Don’t get too bogged down too much in the setup. It can keep you from ever starting. Once you begin, the tools and improvements tend to come naturally. Good luck, and honestly, just start. Looking forward to seeing your videos. aristofun 7 months ago | prev | next [–] From my experience running moderately successfull niche youtube dev channel: 1. The most important thing is the actual content you want to share. The essence, the meat. Net new information or at least unique angle that someone would not find anywhere else. 2. The second most important thing is the actual content you want to share. How clear to the viewer who is this content for. And if viewer is the target audience - how relevant the subject for him now? Why would he care at all. What do I loose by skipping the video? 3. The third most important thing is the actual content you want to share. Why do you share it? What is you motivation? Why should I trust you and listen to you? Oh, yes, it helps if you speak clearly and without fluff. That's it. Nobody (except other wannabe youtube-gurus) cares what's your tech stack or how much you paid for a mic or video editing. IT people come for content. brudgers 7 months ago | prev | next [–] Making videos is the only way to get started. You need a phone and a Youtube account. And to give yourself permission to make crap videos because beginners make crap videos and the only way to not make crap is to learn by doing. [1] And maybe after years of making videos, you might have a popular Youtube channel. But probably not. So you need to decide what success means on your own terms. how do I set up for good content material and make my videos interesting and where can I find royalty free music and clips 1. Audio matters much more than video, and so microphones are better upgrades than cameras. 2. Make videos that are interesting to you. Youtube reaches a worldwide audience and whatever interests you also interests thousands of other people. But they cannot find your videos if
