---
id: 965
url: https://www.nybooks.com/articles/2026/04/09/in-defense-of-algebra-paul-lockhart/
title: In Defense of Algebra | Dan Rockmore | The New York Review of Books
domain: www.nybooks.com
source_date: '2026-03-27'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- academic-paper
summary: Dan Rockmore reviews Paul Lockhart's books defending algebra and mathematics
  education, arguing that mathematics is an art form rather than merely a tool for
  science. Lockhart critiques the standard K-12 mathematics curriculum for reducing
  math to sterile memorization and procedures, instead advocating for an approach
  centered on curiosity, play, and direct engagement with mathematical ideas. Through
  his series of books, Lockhart attempts to repair the emotional and intellectual
  damage caused by traditional math education and help readers discover the beauty
  and creativity inherent in mathematics.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# In Defense of Algebra | Dan Rockmore | The New York Review of Books

Visit us on Facebook! Opens External Webpage Visit us on Twitter! Opens External Webpage Visit us on Threads! Opens External Webpage Visit us on Bluesky! Opens External Webpage Mail to Print page Submit a letter: Email us letters@nybooks.com Reviewed: The Mending of Broken Bones: A Modern Guide to Classical Algebra by Paul Lockhart Belknap Press/Harvard University Press, 377 pp., $29.95 Arithmetic by Paul Lockhart Belknap Press/Harvard University Press, 223 pp., $22.00 (paper) Measurement by Paul Lockhart Belknap Press/Harvard University Press, 407 pp., $25.00 (paper) A Mathematician’s Lament by Paul Lockhart, with a foreword by Keith Devlin Bellevue Literary Press, 140 pp., $16.99 (paper) See All See Less In his autobiography Charles Darwin recalls intending to study mathematics at Cambridge only to discover that “the work was repugnant to me, chiefly from my not being able to see any meaning in the early steps in algebra” (presumably not helped by the “very dull man” who was his summer tutor). Winston Churchill, too, found mathematics a “heavy journey.” “When I plunged in, I was soon out of my depth,” he writes in My Early Life (1930). “We were arrived in an ‘Alice-in-Wonderland’ world, at the portals of which stood ‘A Quadratic Equation’”—that classic algebraic proving ground—beyond which were “further dim chambers lighted by sullen, sulphurous fires…reputed to contain a dragon called the ‘Differential Calculus.’” He credits a teacher at his boarding school with convincing him that mathematics “was not a hopeless bog of nonsense, and that there were meanings and rhythms behind the comical hieroglyphics; and that I was not incapable of catching glimpses of some of these.” For many, the mention of algebra summons only unhappy memories of confused encounters with inscrutable equations. Such experiences underscore the challenge Paul Lockhart has posed for himself in The Mending of Broken Bones: A Modern Guide to Classical Algebra , a book that invites the general reader to gain an appreciation of—and perhaps even actively engage with—a centuries-old mathematical practice often called “symbol manipulation.” The title nods to the etymological origin of “algebra,” the Arabic word al-jabr , meaning “completion” or “mending”—as in the setting of broken bones. But Lockhart’s gesture is more than linguistic; he is well aware that there may also be plenty of emotional fractures in need of repair. Lockhart, a mathematician who taught first at Brown University and UC Santa Cruz and then for many years at Saint Ann’s, a progressive private school in Brooklyn, argues that the injury is due to our ossified K–12 mathematics curriculum. That’s where we encounter algebra as the bread in a difficult-to-digest “algebra-geometry-algebra sandwich,” commonly delivered in grades eight through ten. Mending is Lockhart’s effort to show that it’s not just empty carbs. The Mending of Broken Bones is Lockhart’s fourth book aimed at reeducating the public about mathematics. Throughout his writing it is clear that as much as he loves doing math, he may love even more getting others to love doing math. Indeed, “doing” is the operative word. Lockhart’s goal is to enliven appreciation through direct engagement with mathematical ideas. While many have a utilitarian view of the subject as a “tool for science and technology,” and competency has been in steady decline in the United States for more than two decades, quotidian concerns are not what have spurred him to his proselytizing. Rather, “the glory of [math] is its complete irrelevance to our lives.” Lockhart wants to make the case, urgently, loudly, and unapologetically, that “mathematics is the purest of the arts, as well as the most misunderstood.” Moreover, there is such breathtaking depth and heartbreaking beauty in this ancient art form. How ironic that people dismiss mathematics as the antithesis of creativity. They are missing out on an art form older than any book, more profound than any poem, and more abstract than any abstract. And it is school that has done this! What a sad endless cycle of innocent teachers inflicting damage upon innocent students. We could all be having so much more fun. These exhortations come from Lockhart’s first book, A Mathematician’s Lament (2009), which began as a manifesto that circulated samizdat-style around the mathematics and education communities in the early 2000s. Its thesis is that the standard pedagogy is a “nightmare” of “senseless, soul-crushing ideas” and that a “rich and fascinating adventure of the imagination has been reduced to a sterile set of facts to be memorized and procedures to be followed.” For Lockhart, math should involve “wondering, playing, amusing yourself with your imagination.” As he points out, children already know that “learning and playing are the same thing,” and when taught in this spirit, math can become a lifelong, joyful endeavor. A Mathematician’s Lament is—in true manifesto form—a mixture of sarcasm, exhortation, irony, self-deprecation, poetry, and a little bit of anger. It also contains some opportunities to have fun with mathematical ideas. Lockhart gives new life to the well-worn formula for computing the area of a triangle, infusing it with the excitement of an epiphany. The fact that two odd numbers always add up to an even number is, he coaxes the reader to see, as simple as sliding one arrangement of pebbles into another: You can almost hear the “Aha!” as they fit together. Lockhart’s new book on algebra follows earlier offerings on arithmetic and geometry—both subjects that can feel, at least early on, like child’s play. Arithmetic (2017) frames the study of whole numbers and their basic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division) as a natural investigation of the patterns that occur when arranging objects like the pebbles above, and of the various symbolic languages—from notched sticks to numerals—that have evolved for their representation and communication. The reader will gain a deeper appreciation for the utility of place value notation, as in our familiar decimal system, built on powers of ten, not to mention the landmark invention of the numeral “0,” both of Hindu-Arabic origins. The last chapter serves as an invitation to more elaborate kinds of counting, like the number of different possible poker hands or ways to seat guests around a dinner table, problems that may seem like smart-alecky brainteasers but actually form the foundation of modern probability. Advertisement Measurement (2012) is a gateway to a “universe where beautiful shapes and patterns float by and do curious and surprising things.” Intended as an antidote to the traditional geometry curriculum, it starts with triangles and ends with the geometry of space-time and connections between motion and shape. There are equations, but there are also plenty of hand-drawn illustrations. Sprinkled throughout are recreational rest stops where the reader is gently nudged to think (play) further on their own with a new idea or example. The area of a triangle relates to the area of the rectangle in which it is inscribed, but what about rectangles circumscribed by circles, or boxes within spheres? It’s best to keep a pencil and some paper handy. These questions are intended as opportunities for exploration rather than assignments, and some may not admit the satisfaction of resolution. More and more—perhaps too much?—is asked of the reader as the book goes on. Lockhart is working to nudge the reader to think like a mathematician, and with that come the highs and lows of the creative process. “I’m not going to apologize for how hard it is,” he writes. “You will declare yourself a genius at breakfast and an idiot at lunch. We’ve all done it.” At times one gets the sense of a passionate teacher who lets his frustrations get the better of him. But Lockhart often does this in an effort to persuade the reader that the struggle of the mathematician is the same as that of any artist, and very much worth enduring. So what about algebra? It is, says Lockhart, “the fine art of tangling and untangling abstract numerical information.” “Abstract” is the key word here. We’re no longer just solving the everyday problems of “the construction site and the counting house.” Instead, we are driven by curiosity and aesthetics. We leave the noisy and complicated world of physical reality behind and move to a quieter, more peaceful realm of abstract pattern and ideal beauty—a place I like to call Mathematical Reality. Well, eventually. Most of us are first introduced to algebra in the service of solving word problems. These generally take the form of “I’m thinking of a number such that when I do some stuff to it, it’s the same as if I do some other stuff to it. What is the number?” Sometimes we dress it up as a story. Maybe we’re asked to figure out the age of someone’s uncle or the amount of change in a friend’s pocket. In 1850 BCE , in a word problem written on a Babylonian cuneiform tablet, it was the weight of a mysterious stone: I found a stone but did not weigh it. After I added one-seventh of its weight, And one-eleventh of this new weight, The total was one ma-na. 1 What was the original weight? The discovery of general methods to solve such problems—to “reassemble” a number that has been “shattered into pieces,” as Lockhart puts it—was an extraordinary achievement. Algebra seems to have made its first appearance as a mathematical idea in one of the most important mathematics texts of all time, al-Kitab al-mukhtasar fi hisab al-jabr wa’l-muqabala , or The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing , put together around 813–833 by the Persian mathematician al-Khwarizmi. (Whispers of his name live on in the word “algorithm,” used to describe recipe-like computational processes that, like those in al-Khwarizmi’s book, are at times designed to unravel equations.) It was first translated into English in 1831 by the German Orientalist
