---
id: 97
url: https://www.wired.com/2014/04/mst3k-oral-history/
title: 'Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Definitive Oral History of a TV Masterpiece
  | WIRED'
domain: www.wired.com
source_date: '2025-12-14'
tags:
- tv
- video
summary: Mystery Science Theater 3000 was a cult comedy series that featured a man
  and robot companions riffing on bad movies with witty, rapid-fire commentary. Created
  by Joel Hodgson and debuting in 1988 on a small Minneapolis TV station, the show
  became renowned for its clever, quick humor and cultural references that appealed
  to intelligent viewers—earning fans like Al Gore and Patton Oswalt. Though never
  a major ratings success, MST3K became a beloved cult classic that fundamentally
  changed how audiences could interact with entertainment through comedic commentary.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Mystery Science Theater 3000: The Definitive Oral History of a TV Masterpiece | WIRED

Comment Loader Save Story Save this story Comment Loader Save Story Save this story Joel Hodgson Platon Released in 1966 , Manos: The Hands of Fate is a D-minus of a B movie: Its plot, about desert-­dwelling pagans, makes little sense. Its cast could be out-acted by the stars of a day care holiday pageant. And the film is paced with the urgency and focus of a box turtle on lithium. Luckily, no one has to watch Manos alone. It’s just one of the nearly 200 horror flicks, teensploitation romps, and outer-space oddities to appear on Mystery Science Theater 3000 , the cult-­stoking comedy series that provided awful films with hilarious, sharp, high-speed detractors’ commentary. MST3K is the story of a sarcastic Earth dweller—played initially by series creator Joel Hodgson and, in later years, by head writer Mike Nelson—who’s exiled to a ramshackle spaceship called the Satellite of Love , where he’s forced to watch an endless supply of crapola movies. Our hero’s response to such torture, naturally, is to unleash a torrent of withering one-­liners, or “riffs,” that he delivers with the help of a couple of robot pals. “It was all based on this ­simple idea: that people say shit when they’re watching movies,” Hodgson says. And the shit-saying on MST3K was brilliant. The show was awash in quick, smart wisecracks, not to mention cultural references that ran the gamut from Zsa Zsa Gabor to Miles Davis to Lancelot Link, Secret Chimp. Watching MST3K was like hanging out with a trio of underachieving-­genius best friends. At a time when depictions of geekery were limited mostly to Urkel and Comic Book Guy, the denizens of the Satellite of Love were brazenly brainy—which explains why MST3K ’s fan base reportedly included such meganerds as Al Gore and Patton Oswalt. As fun as MST3K was, though, life aboard the Satellite of Love wasn’t always easy: The show was never a ratings smash, and tension between Hodgson and producer Jim Mallon led to Hodgson leaving the show just a few years into its run. In later years, members of the show’s Midwestern-based, DIY-determined staff found themselves struggling with the sort of big-TV bureaucracy they’d long fought to avoid. To celebrate the 25th anniversary of MST3K ’s national debut, WIRED presents an oral history of the greatest talk-back show ever made. It all begins in the late ’60s in rural Wisconsin, where there was this guy named Joel, not too different from you or me … PART I: IT CAME FROM OUTER SPACE Joel Hodgson ( creator, writer-producer, host, 1988–1993 ): I was a TV junkie as a kid. This was when there were three channels, so I’d watch the farm report or this terrible polka show called Dairyland Jubilee . If I happened to run into a Godzilla movie—or a monster movie of any kind—it was like hitting the lottery. Sometime around seventh grade, I got into ventriloquism and magic. There were these amazing magic catalogs where you could find any trick that you would see a magician do on TV. But because my parents were really big do-it-­yourselfers, I started learning to build my own stuff, like magic tables and tricks. Through high school I figured I’d be a comic magician. I thought I’d work on a cruise ship. Instead, in 1982, after graduating college in St. Paul, Minnesota, Hodgson left the Twin Cities and headed to Los Angeles, where he befriended such comics as Jerry Seinfeld and Garry Shandling and where his clever, prop-filled stand-up act quickly made him a breakout star. Hodgson: It was right when stand-ups were becoming famous. If you had chops and were original, you could move really quickly. I got on Letterman within maybe four months of relocating to LA. Then I got on HBO’s [1983] Young Comedians special and was a guest on Saturday Night Live . Eventually I got asked to be in a Michael J. Fox sitcom called High School U.S.A. I didn’t think it was funny and said no. They doubled the money, and that kind of offended me. I realized, oh, that’s right, my opinion means nothing in Hollywood. I’d seen other people compromise, and I felt that once you gave up on what you wanted to do, you couldn’t go back. It was selling out. So I decided to go back to Minneapolis. Josh "J. Elvis" Weinstein ( writer-performer ): I met Joel after he came back to Minneapolis. I was 15 and had just started doing stand-up. He had an air of specialness about him, because he had been in the big time. He was definitely an artist among comics. Hodgson: I had money in the bank from stand-up, and I was living off that. And I found I had more ideas when I was bored, so I got a job in a T-shirt factory putting appliqués on T-shirts. I also started collaging these robots out of objects I found at the Salvation Army. That’s what I was doing when I met Jim Mallon. Mallon, a filmmaker and prankster, was the production manager at Channel 23 KTMA, a small Twin Cities station whose programming included network reruns and regionally produced shows. One of his first hires was crew member (and future MST3K performer) Kevin Murphy. Jim Mallon ( writer-performer, producer ): The programming at KTMA was bottom-basin. Our prime-time headliner was Love, American Style paired with Hawaii 5-0 , and we had the worst movie library imaginable. Kevin Murphy ( writer-performer, producer ): We started seeking out people in the community who could be on TV, and one of them was Joel Hodgson. Mallon: Joel had three or four drawings on a yellow pad, and he said, “You know how they have these hosted movies? How about instead of having the host at the commercial breaks, we have the host be in the movie?” Hodgson: It was an idea I’d had tucked away in the back of my mind since high school: On Elton John’s Goodbye Yellow Brick Road album, there are illustrations in the liner notes. And for the song “I’ve Seen That Movie Too,” it’s got little silhouettes watching a movie. I remember going, “Someone should do a show like that. Run a movie and have these people in silhouettes say stuff.” Hodgson set the show in outer space and cast himself as “Joel,” a likable janitor who is blasted into orbit and forced to endure all manner of bad movies. Inspired by the 1972 sci-fi drama Silent Running— in which Bruce Dern plays an outer-space botanist who befriends a trio of robots—Joel created and built three chatty pals to join him: the pseudo-suave, sarcastic Tom Servo; the bigmouthed, perpetually eye-rolling Crow T. Robot; and the sweet (but appropriately spacey) sidekick Gypsy. Though Jim Mallon would eventually play Gypsy, in the early seasons the robots would be voiced by local comedians (and MST3K costars) Josh Weinstein and Trace Beaulieu. The program debuted on KTMA on Thanksgiving Day 1988. Hodgson: The movie in the pilot is The Green Slime , which was perfect for Mystery Science Theater : It has big, goofy monsters, guys in suits, and serious people trying to put across real emotion in an absurd situation. But it became clear, after a few films, that this format would work with anything. Weinstein: The whole production cycle at KTMA was like 24 hours long. We’d gather at the station and Jim would have a couple of movies that he’d pulled out of the station’s library. He’d say, “What do you think about this?” We’d watch maybe 10 minutes and go, “OK, yeah. That will do.” Trace Beaulieu ( writer-performer ): I learned how to talk back to movies by reading Mad magazine. They were the first to not treat film like the reverential art form that Hollywood would like you to believe it is, and they would do it visually and verbally. It was an absolutely brilliant thing for a kid to read that and go, “Hey, not everything is the way grown-ups are saying it is.” But in the first season we basically went in cold without watching the films. If you look at those episodes, they’re real hit-or-miss. It was just off the top of our heads. Weinstein: We eventually realized, hey, this might be funnier if we had some jokes in our back pocket. Beaulieu: As a character, Crow was a wiseass. He was certainly influenced by Groucho Marx—always tilting at some kind of authority. But he started out with a very stilted, robotic kind of approach. We had scripted it so that after every line, Crow would say, “Yes, Joel Hodgson. No, Joel Hodgson.” It’s very hard to generate other voices or impressions in that sort of voice. Weinstein: I was inspired to make Tom Servo sort of a smarmy AM radio DJ. He had this incredibly inflated opinion of himself and considered himself a ladies’ robot. Hodgson: Josh really is Tom Servo. When Josh was 16, he drank single-malt scotch and smoked cigars; he was like a 40-year-old man in a 17-year-old body, which is like Tom Servo. And Crow is like Trace: He can do millions of characters, and he splits the difference between being playful and cynical. Mallon: If I channeled anybody for Gypsy, I channeled my mom. She had a heart of gold and always looked to the best of everything and the best of everyone. And when confronted with difficult things, she was somewhat lost [ Laughs ]. She didn’t know how to negotiate when things went poorly. She would be hurt, so Gypsy would be hurt at times and turn to the other robots for support. Crow T. Robot Platon Beaulieu: Our budget for the show was microscopic. I think Josh and I were pulling down $25 a show, and I think Joel’s budget was a little higher, because he had to build props. We thought, well, let’s see how far this goes. We didn’t really know how long the show would last or if anyone was even watching it. Then we put the station’s phone number up on the screen and started getting feedback. That’s when we realized, hey, there’s more than just four or five people watching this. Hodgson: Jim Mallon had the presence of mind to go to the station and make sure we had the rights to the show. He then said to me, “The only logical thing is for us to be 50-50 partners, so we’re not working for each other.” And I shook his hand and said, “I’ll run the creative; you run the business and the technical.” Mallon: Th
