---
id: 892
url: https://cooking.nytimes.com/recipes/761249285-one-pan-chicken-with-golden-potatoes
title: One-Pan Chicken With Golden Potatoes Recipe
domain: cooking.nytimes.com
source_date: '2026-02-27'
tags:
- recipe
summary: This one-pan recipe features chicken thighs marinated in spiced yogurt and
  then roasted with potatoes, onions, and broth in a covered skillet until the vegetables
  soften and the chicken skin becomes crisp and golden. The dish is pantry-friendly
  and largely hands-off, requiring minimal preparation beyond marinating the chicken
  for at least 45 minutes before roasting for about 1 hour 25 minutes total. The recipe
  serves four and pairs well with a simple side salad or steamed greens, with optional
  yogurt served alongside.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# One-Pan Chicken With Golden Potatoes Recipe

David Malosh for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Hadas Smirnoff. Ready In 2½ hr ( 1¾ hr, plus 45 min marinating ) Rating 5 (842) Comments Read comments In this pantry-friendly, mostly hands-off recipe, chicken is marinated in spiced yogurt and then roasted in a covered skillet with potatoes, onions and broth until the chicken releases its flavor into the pan and the vegetables soften. Toward the end of cooking, the pan is uncovered so that the chicken skin turns crisp and golden. This one-pan meal needs nothing more than a side salad or some lightly steamed greens to eat alongside. Feel free to swap out the oregano for dried thyme or increase the cumin if you like, but be sure to keep the turmeric for that nice golden color. Serve with extra yogurt alongside, if you like. Read More Save Log in or sign up to save this recipe. Give Subscriber benefit: Give recipes to anyone As a subscriber, you have 10 gift recipes to give each month. Anyone can view them - even nonsubscribers. Learn more. Subscribe Log In Share this recipe Copy link Email Pinterest Facebook X WhatsApp Reddit Print this recipe Include recipe photo Print Recipe Advertisement Ingredients Yield: 4 servings ⅓ cup plain yogurt, plus more for serving if desired 2 teaspoons ground cumin 1 teaspoon paprika 1 teaspoon dried oregano 1 teaspoon ground cinnamon ½ teaspoon ground turmeric 5 garlic cloves, finely grated 3 tablespoons olive oil, divided Fine sea salt and black pepper 1 lemon, halved 2 to 2½ pounds bone-in, skin-on chicken thighs (about 6 thighs) 1½ pounds red potatoes (about 3 medium), peeled and cut into ¾-inch-thick slices, or another waxy variety 2 large yellow onions, cut crosswise into 1-inch-thick rounds 1 cup chicken broth Add ingredients to Grocery List Ingredient Substitution Guide Nutritional Information Nutritional analysis per serving (4 servings) 44 grams carbs; 288 milligrams cholesterol; 938 calories; 28 grams monosaturated fat; 12 grams polyunsaturated fat; 15 grams saturated fat; 60 grams fat; 6 grams fiber; 1523 milligrams sodium; 55 grams protein; 8 grams sugar Note: The information shown is Edamam’s estimate based on available ingredients and preparation. It should not be considered a substitute for a professional nutritionist’s advice. Powered by Preparation Step 1 Marinate the chicken: In a large bowl, combine the yogurt with all the spices, garlic, 1 tablespoon oil, 1 teaspoon salt and a generous grind of pepper. Squeeze in the juice of half a lemon (you’ll use the other half after the chicken’s roasted) and mix until well combined. Add the chicken pieces and mix until nicely coated. Set aside to marinate at room temperature for at least 45 minutes (or refrigerate up to overnight if getting ahead). Step 2 Heat the oven to 425 degrees. If the chicken is in the fridge, move it to the counter while the oven is heating up. Step 3 Place the potatoes, onions and remaining 2 tablespoons of oil into a large cast-iron skillet, along with ¾ teaspoon salt and a good grind of pepper. Use your hands to mix everything together, keeping the onion rounds intact if possible, then spread in a single layer. Top evenly with the chicken thighs, skin side up, reserving the bowl of marinade. Pour the stock into the bowl, using a spatula to scrape at any remaining marinade, then pour this mixture into the skillet, avoiding pouring on top of the chicken skin. Step 4 Cover the surface with a piece of parchment paper, then tightly cover the skillet with a piece of foil. Transfer to the oven and bake for 1 hour, then carefully remove the foil and parchment paper and use a spoon to baste the chicken skin. Return to the oven for 25 minutes more, cooking until chicken is nicely browned on top and the potatoes are tender. Let settle for 5 to 10 minutes, then squeeze over the remaining half lemon. Step 5 To serve, arrange the chicken, potatoes and onions onto a large serving platter, pouring the juices from the pan on top. Serve warm. Private Notes Leave a Private Comment on this recipe and see it here. Ratings 5 out of 5 842 user ratings Your rating Log in or sign up to rate this recipe. Have you cooked this? Mark as Cooked Log in or sign up to mark this recipe as cooked. Comments All Comments Private Made with all suggested spices. I used chicken breasts (boneless) instead of chicken thighs. Followed all other suggestions. Terrific flavor, chicken was very tender. I would make again. Is this helpful? 231 @Dave Originally most chickens were wiry, tough birds which benefited from long braising. In or around the 1970’s Americans were introduced to the super-sized juicy bubbly bouncy birds developed through complex hybridization to be full-sized for good eating at five to ten weeks of age. Otherwise it took that many MONTHS to grow the typical chicken to a decent size. The new hybrid chickens have softer meat and their tendons haven’t calcified or toughened. The original chicken was shaped like a brick, often had tough calcified tendons in its legs and required longer, wetter cooking methods. If you ever find yourself trying to cook a heritage chicken, consider this recipe or braising the meat or making a soup that takes hours to complete. That is how you tenderize the meat and bring out the ambrosial old-fashioned chicken taste. These methods also work if you need to dispose of a nasty old rooster. The meaner the rooster, the more satisfying the dish. Is this helpful? 222 Seems like a long time to cook chicken at 425 degrees! I'll believe it when I see it. Is this helpful? 142 Marinated the chicken overnight, made sure to push marinade under the chicken skin, followed directions to a T except used 1/2 cup of chicken stock rather than a cup, cooked it in my creuset. Served it with steamed broccoli, the florets were perfect for soaking up the sauce. We practically licked our plates clean even after sopping up the sauce with a hunk of bread. Delicious dish and couldn’t be easier. Is this helpful? 1 Made this with three drumsticks and fewer potatoes and onions. Delicious; it's on my monthly rotation. Is this helpful? Made as written, with a quick run under the broiler to finish the crisping of the skin. The chicken was really good, moist with crisp skin and the spice mixture mellowed to a nice complexity. But the potatoes were completely bland, even using homemade stock and mixing with marinade as instructed. There was a ton of liquid in the pan at the end and the potatoes ended up boiled and greasy. Might do the chicken again, but roast on top of a bed of potatoes, no liquid. Is this helpful? Private comments are only visible to you. Recipe Tags Yogurt Ground Cumin Chicken Thigh Red Potato Yellow Onion Ground Turmeric Roast Chicken Main Course Roast One Pot Marinate Cast Iron Skillet Dinner Gluten-Free Plan-Ahead Budget Log in or sign up to save this recipe.
