---
id: 628
url: https://www.wgbh.org/podcasts/the-big-dig/eps-1-we-were-wrong
title: 'Part 1: We Were Wrong | GBH'
domain: www.wgbh.org
source_date: '2025-01-21'
tags:
- podcast
- nonfiction-book
summary: This podcast episode from GBH explores the origins of Boston's infamous Big
  Dig project through the story of Fred Salvucci, a man who ironically became the
  architect of America's most expensive highway project despite hating highways—his
  grandmother's home was demolished during the 1950s Massachusetts Turnpike construction.
  The episode traces how the federal Interstate Highway System, initially celebrated
  as progress, sparked a nationwide anti-highway movement in the 1960s as cities recognized
  the devastating social and environmental costs of highway construction through residential
  neighborhoods. By examining this historical turning point, the podcast sets up the
  larger question of why American infrastructure projects became plagued by cynicism
  and cost overruns.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Part 1: We Were Wrong | GBH

Listen • 54:00 The Big Dig Podcast Part 1: We Were Wrong 54:00 | The Big Dig Podcast About The Episode There is a strange irony behind the Big Dig: the most expensive highway project ever built in America began with a man who hated highways. This is the story of Fred Salvucci’s journey into activism, during what is perhaps the most transformative anti-highway movement in the nation’s history. Transcript Ian Coss : There are many strange and bitter ironies in the story of the Big Dig, but here's what has to be my favorite. It’s the most expensive highway project ever built in America , and yet the architect – the man who started it all – hated highways. Fred Salvucci: My grandmother lived near here on Lincoln street. Ian : A man named Fred Salvucci Fred Salvucci: And, uh, to engage in ethnic stereotypes. She was this Italian lady that grew terrific tomatoes and sold them to the Polish people next door as if only Italians know how to grow tomatoes, but she grew everything there, tomatoes, potatoes, beans, basil, garlic. It was an incredibly big garden. Ian Coss: And she lost all that. Fred Salvucci: Yeah. She lost all that. MUSIC: Enter ARCHIVAL: The Massachusetts turnpike stretches across the state like a life giving artery. 123 miles... Ian : Back in the 1950s, when Fred Salvucci was a teenager, the state of Massachusetts was on a highway building spree. East to west, north to south, and all around the city of Boston. The greatest of these new roads was the Mass Turnpike. ARCHIVAL: Six lanes, three in each direction, a highway miracle knifing through the heart of New England. Ian : The state celebrated the occasion with this nearly hour-long documentary film. But for a young Salvucci, it was not a time to celebrate. Because the road came through his neighborhood. Fred Salvucci: They took the southern half of Lincoln Street. The neighborhood was mostly Lithuanian and uh, Polish people, Yeah. very poor people with no education, didn't know how to protect themselves. ARCHIVAL: Obviously, some families had to be moved. Structures not worth saving were demolished or burned on the spot. Fred Salvucci: My grandmother was a 70 year old widow, they came to her house in September and gave her a dollar and a piece of paper saying the land is now ours. You have to go. We’ll eventually give you an estimate of what we're willing to pay. And they just squeezed people. ARCHIVAL: And to those responsible for the Turnpikes building. We say hats off. Fred Salvucci: So it was outrageous. And I kind of promised myself that if I ever had to do with public works, I would never treat people the way people had treated my grandmother with the turnpike. Ian : So why is it that a man scarred by highways, would set out to build one? The answer is that he wanted to build a better kind of highway. A more humane kind of highway. And that’s what the Big Dig was. But if that’s all it was….well, we wouldn’t be here, would we? MUSIC: Theme Ian : The subject of infrastructure inspires deep cynicism in America today. There’s a feeling that once our cities were the envy of the world, but now we can barely keep our trains running. That once we built the interstate, and now, anytime we even attempt something ambitious, it’s over budget and behind schedule before a single shovel hits the dirt. ARCHIVAL: Running nearly three years behind schedule… ARCHIVAL: The delay could jeopardize the train's funding plan… Ian : There's almost a sense of glee each time our doubts are proven correct. ARCHIVAL: A multi-billion dollar project… Ian : We can shake our heads, and laugh it off – what a joke… ARCHIVAL: … but only after many more years of costly and complicated construction… Ian : For me, no one project embodies the cynicism around American infrastructure, quite like the one Fred Salvucci would one day take on – what we here in Boston call…the Big Dig . ARCHIVAL: If you think you are furious about the big dig, the mess and the cost overruns you've got company. Ian : If that name Big Dig has only the vaguest meaning to you, don’t sweat it. We’ll get there. But it was a tunnel project, and when I was growing up in Massachusetts in the 1990s, it was hard to ignore. Back then, the project went by many names. It was called the Big Mess, the Big Hole, the Big Pig, the Big Lie. It was – as everyone loved to point out – the most expensive public works project in American history, full stop. It went on, in my young mind, forever -- from before I started kindergarten, until after I graduated high school. And at the end, it was held up for all the world to see as a boondoggle, ARCHIVAL: A 14 billion dollar fiasco… Ian : a cautionary tale, a punchline. ARCHIVAL: Everything that could go wrong. ARCHIVAL: …the big Dig, a construction project that backed up traffic for 16 years. I mean, there are commuters just getting home now. Ian : But if it is a joke, then the joke’s on us – and I don’t just mean us the suckers up in Boston. I mean all of us. Because there are big things that need building in this country. And I, for one, want to know where that cynicism comes from – the feeling that America can’t build big things. My name is Ian Coss, and from GBH News this is The Big Dig: a study in American infrastructure. In many ways, this first episode is the prequel, the turning point that sets the whole saga in motion. We’re not going to talk about the Big Dig just yet, or about how hard it is to build in America, we’re going to start back in a time when America built a lot -- maybe too much -- especially when it came to highways. This is the story of the inevitable backlash – the anti -highway movement. Part One: “We Were Wrong.” Pre-RollIan : The origin story of Fred Salvucci and the Big Dig are really one and the same story. They both begin with the truly most sweeping and expensive building project in American history: that would be the interstate system. ARCHIVAL: This is the American dream of freedom on wheels, an automotive age, traveling on time saving super highways. Ian : The Interstate is so ubiquitous now, it’s almost invisible to us. We’re talking about nearly fifty thousand miles of highway running through every state in the country. It’s the reason you can drive from Seattle to Boston without making a single turn or hitting a single traffic light. And not just to the edge of the city, but right into the heart of it. ARCHIVAL: They can lift traffic up over city congestion with elevated highways raised by an aroused public. Ian : In the 50s and 60s, these roads meant progress…the future. ARCHIVAL: …in San Francisco, the Bayshore freeway is getting… Ian : The big American cities, including Boston, were losing people to the suburbs – specifically white people. Highways were seen as a way to bring them back in. And for the states, the whole thing was basically free. ARCHIVAL: President Eisenhower's militant call for a modern controlled access highway system, led to the passage of the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956. Ian : The deal was this: the feds provide 90% of the money; the states are responsible for the planning and building -- as long as what you're building is an interstate highway. Ian : In Massachusetts, just like everywhere else, the interstate program was a pretty hard deal to turn down. Karilyn Crockett: You had federal money available, ready to go, You had a plan, and the promise of jobs to the tune of about a billion dollars, so to say no to all that, seemed unthinkable. Ian : Karilyn Crockett is the author of the book People Before Highways, and also a professor at MIT. She argues that despite all the incentives to build build build, the costs of that building would eventually force city residents to think the unthinkable. Karilyn Crockett: So the anti highway fight becomes a moment of imagining possibilities. Ian : In the 1960s there were anti-highway movements all over the country – in San Francisco, New York, DC. In many ways, Boston was late to the party, but the consequences of what happened here would be more sweeping than any of the highway battles before it. It would change the way cities and states around the country thought about their urban highways. And Fred Salvucci was at the center of it. MUSIC: Enter So to go back to where we started, with young Fred Salvucci’s story – when he made that promise to his grandmother, to treat people better, to build more humanely, it was not at all clear he would ever get to act on it. As long as he could remember, the plan had always been for him to be a bricklayer, like his father Guido was. G. Salvucci & Company would become G. Salvucci & Son. But the plan got thrown off when Fred was in junior high. His music teacher saw potential in him, and suggested he apply for the city's most prestigious public school -- Boston Latin . He got in. Fred Salvucci: First day at Latin, they give us a piece of paper and it says that I intend to go to college. So I took the thing home and I said, gee Ma, I can't sign this. I don't intend to go to college. This is a lie. Ian : His friends in the neighborhood weren't even planning to finish high school, let alone go to college. But Fred's mother said look: just across the river in Cambridge you've got MIT, one of the best engineering schools in the world. And she made this deal with him: Fred Salvucci: she said, you go work with your father every summer and you learn to be a good bricklayer. You go to MIT if you can get in and you learn to be a good civil engineer when you finish, you can do whichever one you want. Ian : That's how Salvucci wound up a student at MIT -- the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. One day in the early 1960s, he's sitting in class and a professor starts talking about a new highway project proposed for the city. His ears perk up. It sounded an awful lot like the highway that had taken his grandmother's house. Fred Salvucci: It was another piece of insanity. Something that I was sure made no sense. Ian : The difference was that this time, armed
