---
id: 918
url: https://vancouversun.com/news/permanent-daylight-time-bc-heres-what-know
title: 'Permanent daylight time in B.C.: Here''s what to know | Vancouver Sun'
domain: vancouversun.com
source_date: '2026-03-08'
tags:
- news
- politics
summary: British Columbia will transition to permanent daylight time on March 8, 2026,
  eliminating seasonal time changes after years of public support for the move. The
  decision has prompted Premier David Eby to urge neighboring U.S. states and Alberta
  to follow suit, though the lack of U.S. federal legislation has prevented broader
  adoption across the Cascadia region. While health experts generally support the
  change for its benefits to circadian rhythms, concerns remain about potential business
  disruptions and logistical complications from being out of sync with neighboring
  jurisdictions.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Permanent daylight time in B.C.: Here's what to know | Vancouver Sun

The sun is setting on seasonal time changes in B.C. as of March 8, 2026. Photo by Jason Payne / PNG Article content British Columbians have mostly been in agreement for years that moving to permanent daylight time is a good idea. Finally, on Sunday, March 8, 2026, the time has come. Most of B.C. will move clocks ahead an hour for what will now simply be called “Pacific time” — and there the clocks shall remain. Sign In or Create an Account or View more offers Article content The decision by B.C. to finally take the leap opens up a host of questions about what happens next. Let’s take a look at some of them. Article content We apologize, but this video has failed to load. Try refreshing your browser, or tap here to see other videos from our team . We apologize, but this video has failed to load. Try refreshing your browser, or tap here to see other videos from our team . Play Video Article content Article content Who’s with us? Article content West Coast Table Discover the best of B.C.'s recipes, restaurants and wine. By signing up you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of West Coast Table will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again Interested in more newsletters? Browse here. Article content The lengthy delay in dropping the time changes has been about neighbouring jurisdictions. The majority of residents of Cascadia — B.C., Alaska, Washington state, Oregon, California — support an end to seasonal time changes. Article content But the coastal states are stymied by the need for a U.S. federal law abolishing or staying on daylight time, which has not been forthcoming. Several efforts to pass such a law over the past few years in Congress have failed. For now, it looks like the U.S. will end up falling back again in November. Article content Premier David Eby wrote to the governors of Washington, Oregon and California on Tuesday urging them to join B.C. in ending time changes, noting the province decided “we cannot wait anymore.” Article content “The movement to end the seasonal time change is gaining momentum here and around the world. It’s time we all do this together,” Eby wrote. Article content Article content Alberta finds itself in a tricky position. Its eastern neighbour, Saskatchewan, mostly does not observe daylight time. Instead, the Prairie province is essentially on permanent daylight time by observing central time despite being mostly in the mountain time zone. Premier Danielle Smith has signalled Alberta may join B.C. to align with its immediate neighbours. Will that happen this summer? Too early to say. Article content Article content Yukon, in its own time zone, abolished daylight time in 2020. The time there will now be the same as B.C. year-round because we’ll be on daylight saving — ahem, might as well get used to it, on Pacific time — permanently. Article content Read More B.C. makes daylight time permanent Vaughn Palmer: Speaker breaks tie to pass mess of a B.C. budget Advertisement 1 Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Article content Health experts generally support leaving clocks unchanged on the rationale that the changes disrupt circadian rhythms and cause sleep, fatigue and health problems, including an increase in car accidents and strokes in the weeks following the change, especially when we spring forward. Article content Who’s against us? Article content While a 2019 survey showed that 93 per cent of those polled supported permanent daylight time for B.C., barely more than half liked the idea of going it alone because of the logistical problems it might cause. Article content Some in B.C. continue to point to that in opposing daylight time. Business groups like the Greater Vancouver Board of Trade don’t disagree with permanent Pacific time, but warn doing so unilaterally could lead to business uncertainty. President and CEO Bridgitte Anderson called it “an unwelcome distraction that will make it more difficult to attract and retain businesses in British Columbia.” Advertisement 1 This advertisement has not loaded yet. Trending Thinking of renting your home out during the World Cup? Here's what you should know News How B.C.'s conflicting Indigenous land claims are a problem 150 years in the making News Advertisement 2 Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Kwantlen Polytechnic University fires president Bruce Choy News $30 million settlement reached in B.C. class-action sex assault suit against two Catholic schools News Nightly closures begin Sunday on Second Narrows Bridge until March 17 News Advertisement 2 Advertisement This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below. Article content Then premier John Horgan vowed in 2019 to wait for neighbouring jurisdictions, and the board of trade said a survey at the time showed less than 20 per cent of Lower Mainland residents supported going it alone on permanent daylight time. Article content Though supportive of leaving clocks alone, health experts have also said permanent daylight time could cause its own seasonal problems. Those who oppose it note that early morning light is healthier in terms of keeping your circadian rhythms in sync, and that it will make both waking up in the morning and getting to sleep at night more difficult — especially for children. Article content Some schoolkids joined B.C. Premier David Eby on Monday as he announced the province will adopt permanent daylight time. But health experts say the lack of morning sun and later sunsets can be hard on children’s sleep patterns. Photo by B.C. Government Article content What time is it now, and where? Article content When permanent Pacific time kicks in Sunday, March 8, B.C. will be on the same time as its neighbours along the coast. Article content The disruption will come in early November when B.C. doesn’t fall back. That will leave all our Cascadian neighbours an hour behind B.C., while Alberta would be back on mountain standard time — meaning it will be the same time in B.C. and Alberta despite being in different time zones. Another way to look at it: At 5 p.m. in early November, the sun will be setting in Calgary while it will still be shining in Vancouver until around 6 p.m. Article content Article content Barring change in other jurisdictions, from November 2026 to March 2027, B.C. will be: Article content • Two hours behind Ontario and Quebec • On the same time as Alberta and Yukon • An hour ahead of Washington, Oregon and California • Two hours ahead of Alaska Article content When others change to daylight time, March to November 2027, B.C. will be: Article content • Three hours behind Ontario and Quebec • An hour behind Alberta • On the same time as Washington, Oregon, California and Yukon • An hour ahead of Alaska Article content How disruptive will it be to be out of sync with others? Article content There are dozens of implications and logistical changes needed if we fail to line up with other jurisdictions, though not all are problematic. Article content Werner Antweiler of the University of B.C.’s Sauder School of Business doesn’t think B.C.’s November non-change will be too difficult. Businesses “all have plenty of time to prepare,” he said, while those doing business in Alberta could see a small benefit being in the same time zone through winter. Article content Article content Flight schedules might be tweaked with subtle shifts in demand, but Antweiler predicts airlines “will figure this out pretty quickly after the first year. By the second year, nobody will really notice, is my best guess.” Article content Is this the end of the debate in B. C.? Article content In all probability, this is finally a done deal. But as Antweiler points out, California just reintroduced a proposition to voters on ending time changes there, with the twist that this time, residents are being asked if they want to adopt permanent standard time. If it passes, it has the advantage of being able to move ahead under existing U.S. laws. Article content Should that happen, B.C. and the coastal states would likely come under pressure to align under standard time. “So perhaps the last word on this subject matter may not have been spoken quite yet,” said Antweiler. “There is still value in alignment of time zones along the entire coast.” Article content There are even rumblings in the U.S. House of Representatives about moving clocks permanently by only half an hour, splitting the difference between standard and daylight time, as in Newfoundland and Labrador. Article content “If we all end up time-zone confused, blame it on a ‘temporal anomaly’ in the space-time continuum, as is familiar to all Star Trek fans,” mused Antweiler. Article content jruttle@postmedia.com Article content Share this article in your social network Share this Story : Vancouver Sun Copy Link Email X Reddit Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Comments You must be logged in to join the discussion or read more comments. Create an Account Sign in Join the Conversation Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion. Please keep comments relevant and respectful. Comments may take up to an hour to appear on the site. You will receive an email if there is a reply to your comment, an update to a thread you follow or if a user you follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information. Featured Local Savings
