---
id: 82
url: https://timthompson.com/plum/cgi/showlist.cgi?sort=name&concise=yes
title: PLUM - Programming Languages Used for Music
domain: timthompson.com
source_date: '2025-12-22'
tags:
- music
- lisp
- common-lisp
summary: PLUM is a comprehensive directory of programming languages and systems designed
  for music composition, synthesis, and notation. The page lists dozens of specialized
  languages—ranging from notation systems like ABC to synthesis environments like
  Csound and Common Music—each tailored for different aspects of music creation, from
  algorithmic composition to real-time audio processing. Key takeaways include the
  diversity of approaches available (stack-based languages, Lisp-based systems, C
  libraries) and how these languages integrate with various music hardware and software
  platforms like MIDI, synthesizers, and digital audio workstations.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# PLUM - Programming Languages Used for Music

Click on each language name for more details 4CED ABC This notation language was originally designed for transcribing Irish folk tunes, but has since evolved into a considerably richer language allowing, for example, polymetric output on multiple staves. This music notation format has the advantage of being extremely concise and fairly readable. AC Toolbox The AC Toolbox is a Macintosh PPC application to assist the algorithmic composition of music. A legacy version for older, 68K-based computers is also available. Several models for defining musical events are included. They can be used by defining objects such as sections, shapes, masks, or note structures. It is also possible to play, plot, modify, and examine objects in a number of ways. Extensive online help is available. In addition to Midi input and output, the AC Toolbox can also produce text files suitable for use as data in other programs. In particular, score files for Csound, note list files for Common Lisp Music, and tables for MAX can be produced. An important method of creating data in the Toolbox is the use of generators. A number of generators have been included reflecting various approaches to the creation of musical material including tendency masks, stochastic functions, chaotic systems, transition tables, recursive subdivisions, metric indispensabilities, morphological mutations, etc. The AC Toolbox is implemented in Lisp and input syntax often reflects the conventions of this language. It is also possible for a user to extend the Toolbox by adding Lisp functions. For example, additional generators can be defined in Lisp to use with the Toolbox. Adagio Scoring language used by the Carnegie Mellon Midi Toolkit (CMT). ALMA Alphanumeric Language for Music Analysis, implemented at the Institute for Computer Research in the Humanities (NYU). The idea was to incorporate more than Western staff notations. They implemented some crude translators, proof-listeners (analgous to proof-reading), etc. AML - Algorithmic Music Language AML consisted of an interpreter and a compiler. The compiler was written in and used a lobotomized version of the Digital Research MAC assembler. The compiler generated code that was read by the interpreter. The AML interpreter was written in Intel 8080 assembly language. The interpreter created up to 8 virtual machines that drove analog synthesizers using various D/A and A/D hardware. Each virtual machine consisted of a stack oriented computer that processed code specifically designed for generating music. The instruction set consisted various operators for manipulating the stacks, reading note lists, computing note lists in real-time and drawing pseudo random numbers including fractals. A version supporting MIDI was the final development, and this version ran on an Apple 2 computer equipped with an Intel 8080 board which talked to a Roland MPU-401 MIDI interface. A wide range of students and composers in the LA area used this system, many through the UCLA extension program. LA Composer Jeff Rona wrote several works for AML, and it was first demonstrated in Denton TX with his "Step Music" with dancers Sean Green and Dianna McNeil. There is an article in the ICMC proceedings for the Denton conference. AMPLE Forth-like stack-based language, in which letters a-g are the musical notes. A change to capitals indicates a change up an octave, to lowercase is down an octave (symbols < and > do this explicitly). Also is multitasking. Arctic A Functional Language for Real-Time Systems. ARES/MARS MARS is a development system for realtime Digital Signal Processing techniques, sound synthesis, filters and sound effects. Sound and MIDI environments can be developped which allow it to be used as a MIDI musical instrument. MARS is a system for audio research, musical production and the education of computer music, for people who like a programmable and flexible sound machine with realtime performance. autoklang BOLT CAL A lisp-like language that can manipulate MIDI data and do other sequencer-related operations (creating new tracks, etc.) within the Cakewalk sequencer. See http://www.cakewalk.com/devxchange/cal.asp for examples of CAL programs. Canon CHANT CHOPS ChucK Concurrent, Strongly-timed, On-the-fly Audio Programming Language. CLM (Common Lisp Music) Common Lisp Music (CLM) is a sound synthesis package in the Music V family written primarily in Common Lisp. The instrument design language is a subset of Lisp, extended with a large number of generators: oscil, env, table-lookup, and so on. The run-time portion of an instrument can be compiled into C or Lisp code. Since CLM instruments are lisp functions, a CLM note list is just a lisp expression that happens to call those functions. Recent additions to CLM include support for real-time interactions and integration with the Snd sound editor. CMIX Cmix is a package of routines for editing, processing, and creating soundfiles. It also includes a library of routines designed to make it easier to write c programs which deal with soundfiles. A version for Linux, called RTcmix, is maintained by Dave Topper. CMN (Common Music Notation) Common Music Notation (CMN) is a music notation package written in Common Lisp, using CLOS and the Sonata font. It provides for all the usual needs of music notation in a fully customizable, programmable environment. Cmusic Language described in "Elements of Computer Music" by F. Richard Moore. Common Music Common Music (CM) is an object-oriented music composition environment. It produces sound by transforming a high-level representation of musical structure into low-level control statements for a number of different synthesis targets: MIDI, CSound, Common Lisp Music (CLM), Music Kit, CMix, CMusic, RT, Mix and Common Music Notation (CMN). Common Music provides an extensive library of compositional objects and encourages the user to modify and extend the system through subclassing and specialization. Common Music is implemented in Common Lisp and runs on a variety of computers, including NeXT, Macintosh, SGI, SUN, and 386. CompoSeq5 Environment with Stackbased language for music composition. Algorithmic composition, sequences. Multitasking. Outputs through custombuilt interface, for control of analogue synthesizer hardware. CPN View Provides a C++ class library for representing music scores. Works with scores in ALMA, *kern, NIFF, and Esac. Provides a visualisation and analysis paradigm for music. Huge corpus available, with translators from practially all major encodings. Csound Csound is a popular and widely used software synthesis package in the tradition of so-called music-N languages, among which the best-known is Music V. It consists of an orchestra- and score-driven executable, written in C for portability. Basically Csound reads some files and creates the result as a soundfile on disk or, on faster machines, realtime through a DAC. CYBIL CYBIL is a compositional language for the efficient specification of arbitrarily complex Csound scores. It is integrated into CECILIA and can be used to generate scores for any kind of Csound orchestra. The syntax of CYBIL owes to Leland Smith's SCORE language and, to an extent, to Heinrich Taub's Common-Music. Scores are specified as parameter lines with the help of a number of data generators such as sequences, masks, lines and exponentials. These generators can be further modified by the use of functions such as random, urns and constrained random and parameters cross-referencing. DCMP EEL2/JSFX JSFX audio effects for Reaper are written in EEL2, a scripting language that is compiled on the fly and allows you to modify and/or generate audio and MIDI, as well as draw custom vector based UI and analysis displays. EEL2 is based on AVS's EEL. AVS is a programmable visualization plugin for Winamp Elody Elody is a music composition environment that proposes Lambda-abstraction on musical structures as a fundamental mechanism to represent user-defined programs FAUST FAUST (Functional Audio Stream) is a functional programming language specifically designed for real-time signal processing and synthesis. A distinctive characteristic of FAUST is to be fully compiled. The FAUST compiler translates DSP specifications into very efficient C++ code that works at sample level. The generated code is self contained and doesn't depend on any library or runtime. Moreover a same FAUST specification can be used to generate native implementations for most OS (Linux, OSX, Android, iOS) or platforms (LV2, Ladspa, VST, PD, Csound, SC,..) Faust distribution can be downloaded at: http://sourceforge.net/projects/faudiostream The GIT repository can be cloned with the following command : git clone git://git.code.sf.net/p/faudiostream/code faust Flavors Band Lisp-based language. FOIL (Far Out Instrument Language) Foo The Foo environment consists of the Foo Kernel layer and the Foo Control layer. The Foo Kernel layer is implemented in Objective-C and is made accessible to Scheme through a set of types and primitives added to the Elk Scheme interpreter. The Foo Control layer is implemented in Scheme and OOPS, an object-oriented extension to Scheme. Whereas the Foo Kernel layer implements the generic sound synthesis and processing modules as well as a patch description and execution language, the Foo Control layer offers a symbolic interface to the kernel and implements musically salient control abstractions. The user interacts with the Foo environment by writing Scheme programs which eventually will define and execute synthesis patches in non-real-time. FORMES Object-oriented language for music composition and synthesis, written in VLISP. FORMULA FORMULA is a language/multitasking OS for the Atari ST and Mac. It is based on (and built on top of) Forth. The basic idea of FORMULA is to represent music as cooperating processes. For instance, each part of a symphony might be a different process. Also, the generation of pitches, durations, velocities, and tem
