---
id: 878
url: https://mobileapp.bostonglobe.com/03022026_9d26705a-1573-11f1-8a08-0f07aea460e0/content.html
title: TALKING POINTS
domain: mobileapp.bostonglobe.com
source_date: '2026-03-02'
tags:
- news
- politics
summary: Ben Downing, former state senator and executive at Cambridge startup incubator
  The Engine, has been appointed as the new chief executive of the Massachusetts Clean
  Energy Center, taking over in April at a time when the clean-tech sector faces reduced
  federal funding and challenges in offshore wind development. Downing brings extensive
  experience in clean energy policy from his legislative work on the 2016 clean-energy
  bill and his recent efforts fostering clean-tech startups including Form Energy
  and VEIR. The appointment comes as MassCEC, with a $40 million operating budget
  and $141 million in annual grants, seeks leadership during a critical period for
  Massachusetts' clean energy transition.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# TALKING POINTS

TALKING POINTS March 2nd, 2026, 3:41 am SUSTAINABILITY Former senator Ben Downing appointed to lead Mass. Clean Energy Center The Massachusetts Clean Energy Center board tapped Ben Downing (below), an executive with Cambridge startup incubator The Engine, to be the quasi-public agency’s next chief executive. Downing takes over MassCEC at a challenging time for the clean-tech sector, as it experiences significant losses of financial support from the federal government — and in the case of offshore wind power, outright hostility. Downing, though, said he’s hopeful the sector will continue to flourish. “I’m clear-eyed about the challenges we face but [also] optimistic,’’ Downing said. In 2022, Downing joined The Engine, where he helped foster a new generation of clean-tech startups including Form Energy, VEIR, Sublime Systems, and Lydian Labs. Downing said he reached out to Governor Maura Healey’s Energy and Environmental Affairs Secretary Rebecca Tepper, who chairs MassCEC’s board, late last year to express his interest in the MassCEC role after Emily Reichert announced in November that she would be stepping down as CEO. Downing will join MassCEC in April; Jennifer Le Blond has been leading the agency on an interim basis since Reichert’s departure, and will return to her role leading MassCEC’s emerging climate-tech team. Downing became interested in energy and affordability issues as a state senator in the Berkshires, listening to constituents’ concerns after a few paper mills closed due to high energy costs. He became a leader on Beacon Hill as co-chairman of the Legislature’s energy committee and helped write a 2016 clean-energy bill that spurred big projects such as Vineyard Wind and the New England Clean Energy Connect power line. From there, he joined Boston-based solar installer Nexamp in late 2016, working there for four-plus years. He launched a brief run for governor, before bowing out in late 2021, less than a month before Healey formally entered the race. MassCEC has more than 130 employees and an operating budget of more than $40 million, as well as an annual budget for grants of around $141 million and $33 million in capital projects. — JON CHESTO ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE Jack Dorsey’s 4,000 layoffs at Block arouse suspicions of AI-washing When Block Inc. laid off nearly half its staff last week, co-founder Jack Dorsey claimed AI was allowing the company to do more with less. The announcement, though, landed at the center of a complex debate over AI and the future of work: on one side, genuine fear over the technology displacing workers at an unprecedented pace; on the other, deep cynicism that companies are cutting employees and using AI as a shiny excuse for ugly layoffs. The latter has a nickname: AI-washing. However, Block’s recent history suggests that AI adoption is not the only factor influencing its staffing decisions. The company loaded up on workers during and after the pandemic, more than tripling its employee base between 2019 and 2022, and has been slower than peers to scale back. Its stock had fallen roughly 40 percent since the beginning of 2025, a trajectory that had nothing to do with AI and everything to do with a business that had grown unwieldy. Dorsey took to social media on Friday to respond to a critic who pointed to the accusations of bloat that have dogged his companies. Dorsey acknowledged that the company had “over-hired’’ during COVID and operated inefficiently when it ran Square and Cash App as two separate businesses. But he said Block had corrected for all that and it now aims to generate more than $2 million in gross profit per employee, quadruple what it was generating pre-pandemic. The reaction so far on Wall Street is likely to drown out any doubters. Investors sent Block’s shares up 15 percent on Friday in the wake of the cuts.⅛ ­­— bloomberg news BROADCASTING 40 Years, 10,000 Broadcasts In, They’re Still Live on Air On a sunny recent afternoon, Rick Ardon was having trouble picking out the right tie. His first choice was vetoed as “too bright’’ by his news co-anchor, Susannah Carr, who sat at the studio desk with her notes, waiting. When he returned from his dressing room minutes later with an even brighter option, Carr laughed. The meaning was clear: Try again. The third tie was the charm. For more than 40 years, Ardon, 66, and Carr, 73, have had this kind of easy camaraderie behind the scenes as they’ve picked out outfits and gone over their scripts, preparing for the cameras to start rolling on their newscasts for West Australians. The pair, who helm the nightly hourlong TV news program for 7News Perth, are the longest-serving news anchor team in the world. The feat has been designated a Guinness World Record — one that, in a rapidly changing media landscape, they could well hold forever. Local news anchors were once the titans of their networks, famous and trusted pillars of their communities. That era has slowly — and then very quickly — given way to a fragmented world in which people more often get their news from social media feeds or AI chatbots. “I feel so fortunate that I’ve been through the golden era of television,’’ Carr said. “It rose and got to its maximum exposure, and now is coming down the other side and having to adapt to save its life.’’ Carr and Ardon began presenting the 6 p.m. news show, or “news bulletin’’ as it is known in Australia, in 1985. Carr had started her career in the 1970s as a radio announcer for the Australian Broadcasting Corp., where she was the first female newsreader in Perth. Ardon had forgone a university degree to take a job as a newspaper reporter, before shifting to television, where he quickly started reading the news on camera. “There I was at 19 years old, looking about 15,’’ he said. At that time, Perth, the capital of the state of Western Australia, was a small but fast-growing regional city whose population had just surpassed 1 million because of a mining boom. It is one of the most isolated cities in the world. It would take more than a day to get international news stories to air. Film had to be shot on location, edited, and then flown in. “There was no immediacy,’’ Carr said. — NEW YORK TIMES
