---
id: 559
url: https://www.newyorker.com/best-books-2024
title: The Best Books of 2024 | The New Yorker
domain: www.newyorker.com
source_date: '2025-02-25'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- fiction-book
- news
summary: The New Yorker's Best Books of 2024 list features standout titles across
  fiction, poetry, and nonfiction categories. Notable selections include Steve Coll's
  "The Achilles Trap," examining CIA intelligence failures leading to the Iraq War;
  Miranda July's "All Fours," exploring middle-age crisis and desire; and Mosab Abu
  Toha's "Forest of Noise," a haunting poetry collection about Gaza. The curated list
  celebrates works that tackle profound themes ranging from personal transformation
  and environmental history to humanitarian crises and institutional accountability.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Best Books of 2024 | The New Yorker

The Best Books of 2024 All Books The Essentials Nonfiction Fiction & Poetry The Essential Reads Previous Next The Achilles Trap by Steve Coll ( Penguin Press ) Nonfiction It has been tempting to view the C.I.A. as omniscient. Yet Coll’s chastening new book about the events leading up to the Iraq War, in 2003, shows just how often the agency was flying blind. Washington’s failure to foresee Saddam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait, in 1990, was just one of what Coll calls a “cascade of errors” that would start several wars and end many lives. Saddam saw spies around every corner. This was reasonable, given the C.I.A.’s history, but Coll indicates that it was exactly the wrong fear. U.S. intelligence had missed Saddam’s Kuwait-invasion preparations, his nuclear program, and his subsequent disarmament. His real problem was not what the C.I.A. knew but what it didn’t. Buy on Amazon Bookshop Read more : “ When the C.I.A. Messes Up, ” by Daniel Immerwahr When you make a purchase using a link on this page, we may receive a commission. Thank you for supporting The New Yorker . All Fours by Miranda July ( Riverhead ) Fiction July’s second novel is a study of crisis—the crisis being how middle age changes sex, marriage, and ambition. The unnamed narrator is a forty-five-year-old in L.A. with a mellow music-producer husband and a precocious seven-year-old. Less than an hour into a solo road trip to New York, she stops at a gas station, where a young man cleans her windshield. Soon the pair has succumbed to a magnetic, earth-shattering attraction, and the narrator has checked into a nearby motel, where she renovates her room in the style of an opulent Parisian hotel. The room becomes a love nest, of a kind, but a terrible deadline looms. The narrator’s putative road trip must end. What will happen when she goes home to face her life? July’s moving, very funny book is at once buoyant about the possibilities of starting over and clear-eyed about its costs. Buy on Amazon Bookshop Read more : “ Miranda July Turns the Lights On, ” by Alexandra Schwartz From Our Pages The Anthropologists by Ayşegül Savaş ( Bloomsbury ) Fiction A young couple, who live in a city far from both of their home countries and their families, is searching for an apartment to buy. In this subtle and resonant novel, which grew out of a story published in the magazine, Savaş charts the way we sometimes choose—and sometimes drift into—the path to our future. Buy on Amazon Bookshop Books & Fiction Book recommendations, fiction, poetry, and dispatches from the world of literature, twice a week. Sign up » The Burning Earth by Sunil Amrith ( Norton ) Nonfiction In this expansive book, a historian places the earth’s ecological plight in the context of human exploitation. Amrith’s inventory of crucial events begins with the Charter of the Forest of 1217, which granted common people rights to England’s forests. Surveying gold-mining operations in South Africa and oil extraction in Baku, among other enterprises, Amrith recognizes the inseparability of environmental distress and political, economic, and social factors. As he recounts attempts by human beings to squeeze value out of natural resources, he also examines changing attitudes about our relationship to the natural world, which we have long regarded—erroneously, he argues—as separate from, rather than symbiotic with, our species. Buy on Amazon Bookshop On the Calculation of Volume (Book I) by Solvej Balle , translated from the Danish by Barbara J. Haveland ( New Directions ) Fiction This philosophical novel consists of the diary entries of a woman for whom the days have ceased to pass. After a seemingly quotidian afternoon in Paris, the antiquarian bookseller Tara Selter wakes up in her hotel room the next morning only to find the same day happening again. As Tara relives the day—November 18th—she tinkers with variations, considers possible explanations, describes her plight to her husband, and writes. At once a meditation on climate change (because Tara’s calendar never turns, neither does the weather) and an experiment with fictional form, Balle’s novel is also a startling exploration of profound questions about language, human connection, and time. Buy on Amazon Bookshop Challenger by Adam Higginbotham ( Avid Reader ) Nonfiction This comprehensive history of NASA ’s Challenger space shuttle, which exploded shortly after launching on its tenth flight, in 1986, deftly balances a detailed accounting of what led to the disaster with a celebration of the engineers and astronauts who participated in the mission. The most painful passages here show how political maneuvering and cost cutting kneecapped the shuttle program from the very start; in lieu of the fourteen billion dollars it had initially asked for, NASA accepted an offer from Congress of just five and a half billion dollars, what Higginbotham calls “the first of many fatal compromises.” The bureaucratic negligence and ineptitude stands in sharp contrast to the excellence of the crew members, including Christa McAuliffe, the teacher who hoped to become the first “average citizen” in space. Buy on Amazon Bookshop From Our Pages The Empusium by Olga Tokarczuk , translated from the Polish by Antonia Lloyd-Jones ( Riverhead ) Fiction In the Polish Nobel Prize winner’s first novel since the epic “Books of Jacob,” Mieczysław Wojnicz, a child in turn-of-the-century Galicia, grows up in a world of men. His mother is dead, and his father and his uncle, who believe that “the blame for both national disasters and educational failures lay with a soft upbringing that encouraged girlishness, mawkishness, and passivity,” force him constantly to prove his manliness—by braving a toad-ridden cellar or eating duck’s blood soup. He is also taken to many mysterious doctor’s appointments. Years later, as a young man, Mieczysław finds himself recovering from tuberculosis at a “health resort” in the mountains, where strange and sinister things begin to happen. Eventually, Mieczysław discovers the truth both about the town he’s in and about himself. An excerpt from the novel first appeared in the magazine. Buy on Amazon Bookshop From Our Pages Everyone Who Is Gone Is Here by Jonathan Blitzer ( Penguin Press ) Nonfiction Blitzer weaves together a series of deeply personal portraits to trace the history of the humanitarian crisis at the U.S.-Mexico border. It’s a complicated tale, spanning the lives of multiple generations of migrants and lawmakers, in both Central America and Washington, D.C. Blitzer doesn’t pretend to offer easy policy solutions; instead, he devotedly and eloquently documents the undeniable cause of what has become a regional quagmire: the individual right and unfailing will to survive. The book was excerpted on newyorker.com. Buy on Amazon Bookshop Forest of Noise by Mosab Abu Toha ( Knopf ) Poetry Shadowed by the spectre of Israeli warplanes, bombs, and drones, the poems in this haunting collection arrive as dispatches from the rubble of Gaza. Abu Toha, a notable Palestinian poet, speaks of the besieged and the dead in a register that veers deftly, often brutally, between the plainspoken and the lyrical: “In Jabalia Camp, a mother collects her daughter’s / flesh in a piggy bank, / hoping to buy her a plot / on a river in a faraway land.” Throughout, he addresses his own family—his deceased brother, whose grave lay in a cemetery “razed by / Israeli bulldozers and tanks”; his late grandfather, whose “oranges / no longer grow / in his weeping groves.” In this penetrating collection, poetry is not a balm; it is an elegy. Buy on Amazon Bookshop The Freaks Came Out to Write by Tricia Romano ( PublicAffairs ) Nonfiction In the opening pages of Romano’s raucous oral history of the Village Voice , Howard Blum, a former staff writer, declares the paper “a precursor to the internet.” The Voice was founded in 1955, when the persistence of silence and constraint were more plausibly imagined than a world awash in personal truths; in its coverage of everything from City Hall to CBGB to the odd foreign revolution, the Voice demonstrated a radical embrace of the subjective, of lived experience over expertise. In Romano’s book, writers dish on their favorite editors, the paper’s peak era, and when and why it all seemed to go wrong. The story unfolds like the kind of epic, many-roomed party that invokes the spirit of other parties and their immortal ghosts. Buy on Amazon Bookshop Read more : “ How the Village Voice Met Its Moment, ” by Michelle Orange From Our Pages Health and Safety by Emily Witt ( Pantheon ) Nonfiction While chronicling her work as a journalist, her experiments with drugs and altered consciousness in the rave scene, and the cataclysmic events of the pandemic and ensuing lockdown, Witt, a staff writer, hauntingly captures an era in her life and in the life of the nation. Sections about the rise of youth activism, Beto O’Rourke’s Presidential campaign, a gun-rights rally in Virginia, and the return of New York’s club culture originally appeared in the magazine, where the riveting story of the end of a relationship was excerpted . Buy on Amazon Bookshop From Our Pages Intermezzo by Sally Rooney ( Farrar, Straus & Giroux ) Fiction Two brothers, a one-time chess prodigy in his early twenties and a lawyer in his thirties, are mourning the death of their father and trying to make sense of who they are to each other—and to the women whom they might love. “Intermezzo,” Rooney’s subtle and powerful new novel, was excerpted in the magazine’s summer fiction issue. Buy on Amazon Bookshop James by Percival Everett ( Doubleday ) Fiction Since releasing his début work of fiction, in 1983, Everett has published roughly a novel every other year in addition to dozens of short stories, essays, and articles, plus a children’s book and a half-dozen poetry collections. His fictional protagonists have included ornery cowpokes and professors of esoterica. Much of his work is narrated in
