---
id: 25
url: https://kk.org/thetechnium/how-will-the-miracle-happen-today/
title: 'The Technium: How Will the Miracle Happen Today?'
domain: kk.org
source_date: '2026-01-09'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- video
summary: Through personal anecdotes of hitchhiking and traveling across Asia and America,
  the author explores how everyday miracles of human kindness occur when we approach
  life with openness and vulnerability. He argues that receiving generosity is an
  art form requiring a specific mindset of humility and trust, and that both the giver
  and receiver benefit through an exchange of gratitude and shared experience. The
  author suggests that by starting each day asking "how will the miracle happen today?"
  we position ourselves to recognize and accept the consistent kindness of strangers
  that surrounds us.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Technium: How Will the Miracle Happen Today?

* Lifestream * The Technium * Cool Tools * True Films * Extrapolations * Screen Pub * Quantified Self * New Rules * Street Use * Asia Grace * Silver Cord * WINK FEEDS Archive » MOST POPULAR POSTINGS 1,000 True Fans You Are Not Late 68 Bits of Unsolicited Advice The Myth of a Superhuman AI Better Than Free Scenius, or Communal Genius The Thinkism Fallacy 12 Assumptions for Extraterrestrial Life Some Contemporary Heresies The Post-Productive Economy ARCHIVES Six Selfish Reasons to Have Kids The March of Nines How Will the Miracle Happen Today? Essentials for Independent Travel in China Paying AIs to Read My Books The Periodic Table of Cognition The Trust Quotient (TQ) Emotional Agents Everything I Know about Self-Publishing No Limit for Better Artificial Intelligences, So Far An Audience of One Epizone AI: Outside the Code Stack Best Thing Since Sliced Bread? Public Intelligence The Unpredicted vs the Over-Expected The Self-Domesticated Ape The Handoff to Bots 50 Years of Travel Tips 101 Additional Advices Type 2 Growth Rights / Responsibilities The Scarcity of the Long-Term Hill-Making vs Hill-Climbing Future Embarrassments The Trust Flip Things We Didn’t Know About Ourselves The Boredom Device Levels of Wealth The Tradeoffs in AI God, the Superposition The Best Since Sliced Bread Jobs of the Future The Slow Frontier of Genetic Choice How to Walk-and-Talk Paying people to have children The Missing Monuments of Silicon Valley The Sphere, a new platform Dreams are the Default for Intelligence Cringeworthy in the Future China’s Immigrant Energy, Underappreciated 12 Assumptions for Extraterrestrial Life Overcoming Bias Against Bigness The Need For a Body Wishful Worries Robots Will Make Us Better Humans The Religions of Aliens Future Scarcities The Propriety Path Platform Good Morning, New Robots! Creative Commons How Will the Miracle Happen Today? When I was in my twenties I would hitchhike to work every day. I’d walk down three blocks to Route 22 in New Jersey, stick out my thumb and wait for a ride to work. Someone always picked me up. I had to punch-in for my job as a packer at a warehouse at 8 o’clock sharp, and I can’t remember ever being late. It never ceased to amaze me even then, that the kindness of strangers could be so dependable. Each day I counted on the service of ordinary commuters who had lives full of their own worries, and yet without fail, at least one of them would do something kind, as if on schedule. As I stood there with my thumb outstretched, the question in my mind was simply: “How will the miracle happen today?” Shortly after that rare stint of a real job, I took my wages and split for Asia, where I roamed off and on for the next 8 years. I lost track of the number of acts of kindness aimed at me, but they arrived as dependably as my daily hitchhiking miracle. Random examples: In the Philippines a family living in a shack opened their last can of tinned meat as a banquet for me, a stranger who needed a place to crash. Below a wintry pass north of Gilgit in the Pakistan Himalayas, a group of startled firewood harvesters shared their tiny shelter and ash-baked bread with me when I bounded unannounced into their campfire circle one evening. We ended up sleeping like sardines under a single home-woven blanket while snow fell. In Taiwan, a student I met on the street one day befriended me in that familiar way to most travelers, but surprised me by offering me a place at his family’s apartment in Taipei. While he was away at school, I sat in on the family meals and had my own bedroom for two weeks. One remembrance triggers another; I could easily list thousands of such gestures without much trouble, because – and this is important – not only did I readily accept such gifts, but I eventually came to rely on them being offered. I could never guess who the messenger would be, but kindness never failed to materialize once I put myself in some position to receive it. As in my hitchhiking days, I began my days on the road in Asia and elsewhere with the recurring question “how will the miracle happen today?” After a lifetime of relying on such benevolence I have developed a theory of what happens in these moments and it goes like this. Kindness is like a breath. It can be squeezed out, or drawn in. You can wait for it, or you can summon it. To solicit a gift from a stranger takes a certain state of openness. If you are lost or ill, this is easy, but most days you are neither, so embracing extreme generosity takes some preparation. I learned from hitchhiking to think of this as an exchange. During the moment the stranger offers his or her goodness, the person being aided can reciprocate with degrees of humility, dependency, gratitude, surprise, trust, delight, relief, and amusement to the stranger. It takes some practice to enable this exchange when you don’t feel desperate. Ironically, you are less inclined to be ready for the gift when you are feeling whole, full, complete, and independent! One might even call the art of accepting generosity a type of compassion. The compassion of being kinded. One year I rode my bicycle across America, from San Francisco to New York. I started out camping in state parks, but past the Rockies, parks became scarce, so I switched to camping on people’s lawns. I worked up a routine. As darkness fell, I began scouting the homes I passed for a likely candidate: neat house, big lawn in the back, easy access for my bike. When I selected the lucky home, I parked my bag-loaded bike in front of the door and rang the bell. “Hello,“ I’d say. “I’m riding my bike across America. I’d like to pitch my tent tonight where I have permission and where someone knows where I am. I’ve just eaten dinner, and I’ll be gone first thing in the morning. Would you mind if I put up my tent in your backyard?” I was never turned away, not once. And there was always more. It was impossible for most folks to sit on their couch and watch TV while a guy who was riding his bicycle across America was camped in their backyard. What if he was famous? So I was usually invited into their home for desert and an interview. My job in this moment was evident: I was to relate my adventure. I was to help them enjoy a thrill they secretly desired, but would never accomplish. My account in their kitchen would make this legendary ride part of their lives. Through me and my retelling of my journey, they would get to vicariously ride a bicycle across America. In exchange I would get a place to camp and a dish of ice cream. It was a sweet deal that benefited both of us. The weird thing is that I was, and still am, not sure whether I would have done what they did and let me sleep in the backyard. The “me” on the bicycle had a wild tangled beard, had not showered for weeks, and appeared destitute (my whole transcontinental trip cost me $500). I am not sure I would invite a casual tourist I met to take over my apartment, and cook for him, as many have done for me. I definitely would not hand him the keys to my own car, as a hotel clerk in Dalarna, Sweden, did one mid-summer day when I asked her how I could reach the painter Carl Larsson’s house 150 miles away. The many times I was down or dazed, and a stranger interrupted their life to assist me is a less perplexing mystery to me that when, for no noble reason at all, an impoverished legendary Chinese painter insists that I take one of his treasures. I’d like to think that I would without hesitation drive far out of my way to bring a sick traveler to the hospital (in the Philippines), but I am having trouble seeing myself emptying my bank account to purchase a boat ticket for someone who has more money than I do. And if I were a cold drink seller in Oman, I would definitely not give cold drinks away for free just because the recipient was a guest in my poor country. But those kind of illogical blessings happen when you are open to a gift. Yet while I rely on miracles, I don’t believe in saints. There are no saints even among the gentle monks of Asia, or I should say, especially among the monks. Rather, generosity is rampant in everyday lives, but no more in one place, race, or creed than others. We expect altruism among kinfolk and neighbors, although the world would, as we all know, be a better place if neighborhood and family kindness happened even more. Altruism among strangers, on the other hand, is simply strange. To the uninitiated its occurrence seems as random as cosmic rays. A hit or miss blessing that makes a good story. The kindness of strangers is gift we never forget. But the strangeness of “kindees” is harder to explain. A kindee is what you turn into when you are kinded. Curiously, being a kindee is an unpracticed virtue. Hardly anyone hitchhikes any more, which is a shame because it encourages the habit of generosity from drivers, and it nurtures the grace of gratitude and patience of being kinded from hikers. But the stance of receiving a gift – of being kinded — is important for everyone, not just travelers. Many people resist being kinded unless they are in dire life-threatening need. But a kindee needs to accept gifts more easily. Since I have had so much practice as a kindee, I have some pointers on how it is unleashed. I believe the generous gifts of strangers are actually summoned by a deliberate willingness to be helped. You start by surrendering to your human need for help. That we cannot be helped until we embrace our need for help is another law of the universe. Receiving help on the road is a spiritual event triggered by a traveler who surrenders his or her fate to the eternal Good. It’s a move away from whether we will be helped, to how: how will the miracle unfold today? In what novel manner will Good reveal itself? Who will the universe send today to carry away my gift of trust and helplessness? When the miracle flows, it flows both ways. When an offered gift is accepted, then the threads of love are knotted, snaring both the stranger who is
