---
id: 708
url: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=46610557
title: The $LANG Programming Language | Hacker News
domain: news.ycombinator.com
source_date: '2026-01-13'
tags:
- news
- social-media
- github-repo
summary: A Hacker News user curated historical collections of programming language
  announcements on the site, tracking posts titled "The {name} Programming Language"
  and "Show HN" programming language posts going back to notable releases like Go
  (2009), Rust (2010), and Swift (2014). The post sparked humorous discussion from
  users who initially mistook "$LANG" for an actual new programming language name,
  leading to creative jokes about what such a language might feature and references
  to existing languages like S-Lang and Slang.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The $LANG Programming Language | Hacker News

Hacker News new | past | comments | ask | show | jobs | submit login The $LANG Programming Language 214 points by dang 11 hours ago | hide | past | favorite | 42 comments This afternoon I posted some tips on how to present a new* programming language to HN: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=46608577 . It occurred to me that HN has a tradition of posts called "The {name} programming language" (part of the long tradition of papers and books with such titles) and it might be fun to track them down. I tried to keep only the interesting ones: https://news.ycombinator.com/thelang Similarly, Show HNs of programming languages are at https://news.ycombinator.com/showlang . These are curated lists so they're frozen in time. Maybe we can figure out how to update them. A few famous cases: The Go Programming Language - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=934142 - Nov 2009 (219 comments) The Rust programming language - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=1498528 - July 2010 (44 comments) The Julia Programming Language - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3606380 - Feb 2012 (203 comments) The Swift Programming Language - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=7835099 - June 2014 (926 comments) But the obscure and esoteric ones are the most fun. (* where 'new' might mean old, of course - https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=23459210 ) chuckadams 10 hours ago | next [–] For a moment I thought there was actually a new language called $LANG, which would have been wonderful. reply librasteve 5 minutes ago | parent | next [–] well Raku has the Slangify module https://raku.land/zef:lizmat/Slangify reply trollbridge 10 hours ago | parent | prev | next [–] I was thinking how it would be odd to have a programming language called en_AU.UTF-8. reply mixmastamyk 9 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] echo “G’day World!” reply edoceo 9 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] *G'day mate reply anotherevan 8 hours ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] drawl “G’day mate.” reply Radle 4 hours ago | parent | prev | next [–] Same! My first thoughts: "Is this language pronounced Lang or Slang? Slang is actually a cool name for a new programming language..." reply jcynix 3 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] There has been https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-Lang for ages, ... And even much older: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S_%28programming_language%29 reply hmry 3 hours ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] http://shader-slang.org/ agrees reply Lammy 8 hours ago | parent | prev | next [–] There's a language called SLang inside Goldman Sachs used for their SecuritiesDB, and that's how I read it at first glance even with the dollar sign lol https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael_Dubno#SecDB reply snthpy 4 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] That's what I thought too. The $ sign seemed quite appropriate given Goldman's line of business. reply wahern 5 hours ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] See also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/S-Lang ( https://www.jedsoft.org/slang/index.html ), a (stack-based) scripting language implementing a terminal UI toolkit. Mutt can use use S-Lang instead of ncurses. reply dang 7 hours ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] I wonder what a program written in that language looks like. reply rayxi271828 6 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] Slang? The IDE looked like Turbo C++ of old (blue, text based interface). Shortcuts are weird, so you need to remap keys to get sane defaults. Probably the most unique feature is that the language supports spaces in identifiers. So you'd have variables like "Option Portfolio Risk" or functions like "Calculate Estimated PnL". Visually obviously different from Python, but it gave me Pythonic vibes. It's also nice that it supports preconditions, so you can specify the valid range of arguments etc. It has some kind of OOP support but tbh it felt bolted on (understandably). But the most value adding, IMHO, is the DevEx and deep integration with SecDb. Say what you want about the DOS-like IDE and the old (20+ years old for sure, maybe 30+) language, but you can deploy your code SO easily into production, with guardrails in place. Out of curiosity, I implemented a toy language (thanks to Robert Nystrom's Crafting Interpreters) that supports spaces in identifiers ( https://github.com/rayfdj/gaul-lang ) as well. Makes for an interesting weekend coding project, and it helps me understand more the tradeoffs that Slang designers must have gone through. reply charleszw 3 hours ago | root | parent | prev | next [–] See also the Slang shader language, it's a pretty recent development! https://shader-slang.org reply fermigier 5 hours ago | parent | prev | next [–] There was a Linux distribution (briefly) called "$DISTRO". Known today as "Ubuntu". reply hashmush 2 hours ago | parent | prev | next [–] I use that every day at $WORK! reply null_onset 8 hours ago | parent | prev | next [–] The $LANG programming language, where the keywords are all just in-jokes that change from week to week. reply lproven 2 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] darmok := jalad[talaka] reply cvoss 8 hours ago | parent | prev | next [–] Likewise. Thought it'd be pronounced "slang", and thought the semantics would be you define LANG=<name of a language> at the top of the file (like a hashbang) and then write in whatever language you please. $LANG is a neato language because it has all the coolest features rolled into one unified design: polymorphic lifetime borrowing, endofunctor monoid monads, (stacked) coroutines, and even quantum data types. reply almusdives 23 minutes ago | prev | next [–] Just wanted to say this post has caused a huge spike in traffic to my language's website: a dizzying ~40 visitors per day up from ~0 haha! reply Animats 5 hours ago | prev | next [–] See "The Your Name Here Story" (1960) [1] It's a generic industrial film. [1] https://archive.org/details/YourName1960 reply dang 11 hours ago | prev | next [–] Yikes, I tanked HN's performance by posting this! Probably because of loading all those old threads over and over. I've moved the URL out of the link at the top, which seems to be helping for now. (now I have to decide whether to go down another rabbit hole and fix that) reply johnfn 10 hours ago | prev | next [–] This is a fun false positive :) https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=34675259 reply dang 10 hours ago | parent | next [–] Whoops! I tried to catch those but yes. reply sjosh 7 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] Another false positive: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=13252407 Thanks for making this! reply dang 6 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] Not sure if I should remove those or leave them in for color! I did remove "The Perfect Programming Language" and "The Enterprise Programming Language" and a few others that weren't real languages. "Enterprise" is a great name for a programming language though. reply rchard2scout 4 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] One more false positive: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=16860445 "Value in Learning Yet Another" also seems like a great name for an esoteric programming language. reply gdotdesign 3 hours ago | prev | next [–] Thanks for putting these lists together. When Mint reaches 1.0 I'll use the same format to present it here. reply fsckboy 7 hours ago | prev | next [–] the headline made me think somebody else came up with my idea. I wanted to a create a language whose name was langlang. to understand how to parse it, that would be the equivalent as a name to C, and the equivalent to clang would be langlanglang. I considered the shorter name lang, but lang already has a meaning and I thought then in that world langlang might confuse people as to the actual name of the language, whereas since langlanglanglang is clearly needless overkill in a name, langlang and langlanglang would provide just the right amount readability and reinforcement as to the actual name of langlang. reply zahlman 8 hours ago | prev | next [–] That reminds me, I really should blog my design ideas for my spiritual successor to Python.... reply macintux 10 hours ago | prev | next [–] I feel like there’s an Advent of Code challenge lurking here. reply GaryBluto 11 hours ago | prev | next [–] Very useful! Thanks for the addition. reply wizzwizz4 11 hours ago | prev | next [–] So these are just static pages, not new entries for https://news.ycombinator.com/lists ? reply dang 11 hours ago | parent | next [–] Alas, yes, at least for now. Seems like an LLM could be good at finding them though. A regex is probably too crude. reply wizzwizz4 10 hours ago | root | parent | next [–] The old lesson from the Wizard of Oz experiment says that a regular expression probably isn't too crude, if you're willing to take the time to design it. Though you could probably get away with running a regex golf algorithm (e.g. https://nbviewer.org/url/norvig.com/ipython/xkcd1313.ipynb ) over the list of matching titles, and the union of some list of non-matching-but-close titles (chosen to get good discrimination) with some list of way-off titles (to avoid overfitting). (You could treat the whole HN title database, other than the ones you've identified, as losers, but that risks hardcoding the absence of a post you accidentally missed, and would also take slightly longer – though Peter Norvig's first algorithm takes time linear in the number of losers, so it might not be too expensive. I don't know how expensive his improved versions are, given large lists of losers: https://nbviewer.org/url/norvig.com/ipython/xkcd1313-part2.i... . Better algorithms are surely available.) reply big-chungus4 5 hours ago | prev | next [–] where can I check out the language? reply MopAmine 5 hours ago | prev | next [–] idk reply jeswin 9 hours ago | prev [–] I did a Show HN for a language called Tsonic yesterday, which is a variant of TypeScript (all tsonic is valid typescript) requiring stronger typing which compiles to x64/ARM native code via .Net/NativeAOT. https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=466043
