---
id: 801
url: https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/61089520-the-man-from-the-future
title: 'The Man from the Future: The Visionary Ideas of John von Neumann by Ananyo
  Bhattacharya | Goodreads'
domain: www.goodreads.com
source_date: '2026-02-09'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- academic-paper
- physics
summary: '"The Man from the Future" is a biography of John von Neumann by Ananyo Bhattacharya
  that explores the life and contributions of one of history''s most influential but
  underappreciated scientists. Von Neumann, a Hungarian-born child prodigy, made groundbreaking
  contributions across multiple fields including quantum mechanics, computer science,
  game theory, nuclear weapons design, and economics, fundamentally shaping the modern
  world. The book chronicles how his exceptional intellect and the unique historical
  circumstances of the 20th century allowed him to revolutionize diverse scientific
  disciplines and leave an indelible mark on contemporary civilization.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Man from the Future: The Visionary Ideas of John von Neumann by Ananyo Bhattacharya | Goodreads

Jump to ratings and reviews Want to Read Rate this book The Man from the Future: The Visionary Ideas of John von Neumann Ananyo Bhattacharya 4.10 3,266 ratings 405 reviews Want to Read Rate this book The smartphones in our pockets and computers like brains. The vagaries of game theory and evolutionary biology. Nuclear weapons and self-replicating spacecrafts. All bear the fingerprints of one remarkable, yet largely overlooked, man: John von Neumann. Born in Budapest at the turn of the century, von Neumann is one of the most influential scientists to have ever lived. A child prodigy, he mastered calculus by the age of eight, and in high school made lasting contributions to mathematics. In Germany, where he helped lay the foundations of quantum mechanics, and later at Princeton, von Neumann’s colleagues believed he had the fastest brain on the planet—bar none. He was instrumental in the Manhattan Project and the design of the atom bomb; he helped formulate the bedrock of Cold War geopolitics and modern economic theory; he created the first ever programmable digital computer; he prophesized the potential of nanotechnology; and, from his deathbed, he expounded on the limits of brains and computers—and how they might be overcome. Taking us on an astonishing journey, Ananyo Bhattacharya explores how a combination of genius and unique historical circumstance allowed a single man to sweep through a stunningly diverse array of fields, sparking revolutions wherever he went. The Man from the Future is an insightful and thrilling intellectual biography of the visionary thinker who shaped our century. Genres Biography Science Nonfiction History Physics Mathematics Technology ...more 368 pages, Paperback First published October 7, 2021 Book details & editions 729 people are currently reading 8110 people want to read About the author Ananyo Bhattacharya 5 books 103 followers Follow Follow Ananyo Bhattacharya holds a PhD in biophysics from Imperial College London and has worked as a science correspondent at the Economist, an editor at Nature, and a medical researcher at the Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute in San Diego, California. He lives in London. Ratings & Reviews What do you think? Rate this book Write a Review Friends & Following Create a free account to discover what your friends think of this book! Community Reviews 4.10 3,266 ratings 405 reviews 5 stars 1,128 (34%) 4 stars 1,456 (44%) 3 stars 571 (17%) 2 stars 93 (2%) 1 star 18 (<1%) Search review text Filters Displaying 1 - 30 of 405 reviews Jen 95 reviews 901 followers Follow Follow February 9, 2023 Folks, I'm so hot right now I feel like I've been shoving hot tamales up the devil's own incontinent pisshole while performing capsaicin kegels, peaking at around 2.2 million dilutions of sugar water (i.e. Scoville Heat Units). Additionally: some impromptu high-performance liquid chromatography to analytically quantify cooter capsaicinoids content in order to obviate the possibility of user error. (sensory fatigue being a real issue when the wet placenta of a giant Carolina reaper is stuffed in your nakadashi). That subjective organoleptic tests have largely been superseded by analytical methods such as HPLC is perhaps no surprise when you consider the number of people who have killed themselves by sticking bulbs of cotton soaked with Bhut Jolokia juice up their keisters (citation needed) and transformed the considerable number of capsaicin receptors in their anus into an Amorphophallus Titanum (i.e. Corpse Flower) with giant dermal lesions for thorns which no milk enema can prune. This is roughly equivalent to having a can of bear mace detonate inside the distal end of your alimentary canal while you're taking a test on conformal mappings and the Poincare model of non-Euclidean geometry, Cauchy-Goursat theorem and Cauchy integral formula, and so on (ie. etcetera), which sounds like Cthulhu shitting himself underwater, causing everyone in the class (including the professor, who is a militant anti-theist) to pivot two shitty cameras on a slow-ass gimbal (i.e. break their goddamn necks trying to figure out who stepped on Satan's duck) and all murmur in unison, "We are never alone..." And you meekly raise your hand and squeak, "I am basically Kathy Acker if she had access to Wikipedia." All of this to say: John von Neumann was built differently than you and I, and would've gotten through the material of this test with such alacrity (whilst saturation bombing every respective field in his cone of vision with paradigm shattering insights) that the canister of oleoresin capsicum would never have had time to overheat to the point of discharging in his asshole and fumigating his digestive tract with grizzly deterrent. Bhattacharya makes this clear by providing a whore's ervv (sic) (i.e. Hors d'oeuvre) of The Martian's contributions to human knowledge, the full course of which would carry on in this annoying fashion: Mathematics (foundations of mathematics, measure theory, functional analysis, eating a box of index cards covered in arcane mathematical graffiti while standing in front of a mirror and proclaiming, "I am the Dragon. And you call me insane. You are privy to a great becoming, but you recognize nothing. To me, you are a slug in the sun. You are an ant in the afterbirth. It is your nature to do one thing correctly. Before me, you rightly tremble. But, fear is not what you owe me. YOU OWE ME AWE!" (seeks verification), backflipping and punching someone so hard in the solar plexus that they stagger into the punch bowl with a look of severe constipation and clamp the foldable party table around them like two pieces of stiff wonder bread (unsourced statement), ergodic theory, group theory, lattice theory, representation theory, operator algebras, dividing by zero (does not compute), geometry, and numerical analysis), physics (quantum mechanics, binding his feet with black electrical tape because he forgot his ninja tabi (whose passive mitigation stacks multiplicatively with armor and other damage reduction effects) and would not wish to alert his enemies with the albedo soles of his frozen asteroids (citation needed) hydrodynamics, nuclear physics and quantum statistical mechanics), economics (game theory and general equilibrium theory), computing (Von Neumann architecture, linear programming, numerical meteorology, creating sentient custards, scientific computing, self-replicating machines, stochastic computing), and statistics. He also published over 150 papers in his life: about 60 in pure mathematics, 60 in applied mathematics, 20 in physics, and the remainder on special mathematical subjects or non-mathematical ones, including this somewhat cryptic missive which reads: "Asimov is a specialist beyotch. Act up." (false) Am I suggesting that innate talent does a lot of the heavy lifting when it comes to reasoning quantitatively? Affirmative. Am I saying that you or I could never hope to be as smart as Neumann with equal resources - both attentional and material? Without question. If you find this observation disquieting, or it makes you want to cite the late Stephen J. Gould (who, bless his soul, could really turn a phrase, but managed to write a book which was so besieged by sentiment that it crowded all the space needed to transform it from an overtly political polemic into a scientifically respectable critique) I would avoid reading this book, because right here is a SON OF A BITCH that - sorry sorry. What I mean to say is; you can't read about differences in cognitive ability this stark without wanting to Isekai yourself with a tractor. Right here is a man that quite possibly exceeds the late Dick Feynman in his ability to make you feel as though dumbfuckery has infiltrated your lymphatic system, hopped every node critical to your cognitive self esteem and reduced you to a pile of groats and suet, which astute journalists construe as: "A new type of organism which resembles nothing so much as a moronic blood pudding of some kind." If you're a swinging dick in a town of enfeebled flapdoodles, you are probably not acquainted with the ways in which a member can mutate into Fred Flintstone's cudgel, and so you may have trouble conceptualizing a creature that can make theoretical breakthroughs with a grace you can only harness when navigating towards titty-mags - but take it from me; it just ain't fair. That being said, I think you should occupy the position of a moronic slime at some point in your life. It's an interesting exercise in perspective taking. Not only will it help you remain grounded, it will also provide a window into the challenges that educators face in attempting to generalize their craft across the population. Addressing achievement gaps is quite difficult when it becomes impossible, (due to ideological moratorium), to acknowledge the individual differences in cognitive ability which are not the result of environmental/educational factors. So if you don't have the luxury of surrounding yourself with people who're freakishly well endowed, you can gawk at perhaps the biggest *redacted* in history by picking up this issue of Raise Your Dongers. This COMPLETE BASTARD who could divide two eight-digit numbers in his head at the tender age of six, while also requesting Kürtőskalács in Ancient Greek. Who, at this same age, caught his mother staring out a window and remarked: "I often dream of huge numb buildings. Jet-black sinister architecture being installed when nobody sees. Their appearance so sudden that few would take notice. And when I wake up, I imagine being crushed by one. Imagine its weight, its silence. The absence of excuses for a havoced life, and the privilege of a 22-kilometer tombstone. A body of black that carried no reflection. Defying its own room. Unearthly eggs of decreation." (citation needed) (i.e. "What are you calculating?"). Who, as an eight year old, was regularly exchanging sexual favors with differential and inte
