---
id: 71
url: https://blog.fogus.me/2025/12/23/the-best-things-and-stuff-of-2025.html
title: The Best Things and Stuff of 2025
domain: blog.fogus.me
source_date: '2025-12-26'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- video
- fiction-book
- gaming
summary: 'This blog post is an annual retrospective by programmer and writer Fogus
  highlighting the best things he discovered, read, and experienced in 2025. The post
  covers favorite articles and videos (including pieces on recursive real arithmetic,
  Magic: The Gathering history, and Cormac McCarthy''s library), his own most-viewed
  posts on programming languages and board games, notable technical books like "Mouse,
  a Language for Microcomputers," and beloved fiction reads including classic mysteries
  and fantasy novels. The curated list reflects his interests in systems-thinking,
  programming, obscure literature, and games, while emphasizing that these discoveries
  span various time periods and domains rather than being exclusively new releases.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Best Things and Stuff of 2025

[ fogus.me / send more paramedics / read-eval-print-λove / src ] Great things and people that I discovered, learned, read, met, etc. in 2025. No particular ordering is implied. Not everything is new. also: see the lists from 2024 , 2023 , 2022 , 2021 , 2020 , 2019 , 2018 , 2017 , 2016 , 2015 , 2014 , 2013 , 2012 , 2011 and 2010 Great posts | articles | vids read/watched A calculator app? Anyone could make that by Chad Nauseam, esquire - I love the story about how Hans Boehm and friends developed a mind-blowing approach called recursive real arithmetic for numbers like pi and (sqrt 2). The post details various symptom -> problem definition -> alternative solutions -> solution cycles that the team met along the way and should be required reading for programmers. Lost in Manboo - マンガ喫茶マンボ (manga cafe manboo) shows life for some folks who live in 24-hour game cafes in Japan. The video is dystopic in a way that matches our modern world perfectly. 1 The Making of Deeper in You on the OP-1 - Shows an artist’s approach to song creation/composition using the OP-1 synthesizer. This is hypnotic to watch for someone with zero musical talent like myself. An interview with Jack Rusher by The Creative Independent - A lovely interview with online friend Jack Rusher discussing the thoughtful application of tech in art, flow, and the state of research in the modern computing industry. Uncredited: Searching for Lost Board Game Designers by Amabel Holland - Amabel describes her trials and tribulations while trying to find the designers of the long-forgotten board game Duplicate Ad-Lib Crossword Cubes . Brian Weissman on his Magic the Gathering history - For anyone who came of age during the earliest years of Magic, the name Brian Weissman is legendary. In this interview he gives countless anecdotes about his experiences in those early days. Before Arcturus: David Lindsay’s Lost Novels by Mark Valentine - Mark’s research into David Lindsay revealed evidence that he submitted at least two earlier novels, Aletheus and The Confessions of an Egoist, to the publisher Chatto & Windus in 1902 and 1908. These submissions predated his first published masterpiece, A Voyage to Arcturus . What Dan Read by Dan - An amazing account of a lifetime of reading. Two Years After Cormac McCarthy’s Death, Rare Access to His Personal Library Reveals the Man Behind the Myth by Richard Grant - A glimpse into Cormac McCarthy’s massive, chaotically organized personal library reveals the reclusive author as a polymath with an insatiable curiosity. Scholars are currently cataloging the estimated 20,000 volumes, many of which contain the author’s annotations. Most viewed posts/videos with/by me While I’ve posted a few technical post on my personal blog, I’ve taken a lot of time to guest-post on the Wormwoodania blog about weird, macabre, and sardonic fiction and other related, non-technical topics. I hope to continue this trend into next year. Also, my most assiduous readers will have noticed that I’ve written more about games. I’ve decided to keep those posts on this blog since my intent for the site has always been about systems and systems-thinking and games are a great way to study and model systems. The long season of langdev - Whereby I speculate if programming language development is in a lull. On ‘Baron Corvo: The Greatest Asshole Who Ever Lived’ - My review of Johan Kugelberg’s pamphlet on why Baron Corvo still intrigues people. 2 Derek Raymond and ‘The Black Novel’ - Discusses the author Derek Raymond’s criteria for what he calls ‘black novels’. Corvo’s Icicle - Did Baron Corvo invent the mystery trope of the melting weapon? Arities as Pseudo-Protocol - Whereby I describe a little-used Clojure technique leveraging function arities as a lightweight interface/protocol. My appearance on the Apropos Podcast - Sat down with the Apropos crew and had a great time talking Clojure. Meeting Corvo and Weeks in Georgetown - A brief description of some of my hobby research. 18XX: A System of Systems - A description of 18XX board games as a system of systems. The Bird-Poker Deck - A truncated pack of playing cards that displays some interesting game-play characteristics. Checkers Arcade - Using an American Checkers set to play many deep games of abstract strategy. Favorite technical books discovered (and read) Mouse, a Language for Microcomputers by Peter Grogono - Mouse is basically an esolang with barely any abstraction facilities, but the book was well-written and the language compelling enough to explore further. Notes on Distance Dialing (pdf) by AT&T - Described the telephone systems of the USA and Canada in the mid-1950s. The reading is a dry as it gets, but it was a fascinating dive into a vastly complex system solving extremely hard problems. This is a must-read for folks interested in systems-thinking. That said, I am actively looking for recommendations for books about the process of designing and building the unbelievably complex telephony system over the rudiments of the earlier systems. Recommendations welcomed! Favorite non-technical books read The vast majority of my reading this year was fiction, and I discovered some real gems. 3 The Eye of Osiris by R. Austin Freeman - This is the first book that I’ve read from Freeman and I suspect that I will read many more in the future. The story follows the disappearance of John Bellingham, Egyptologist and the subsequent investigation. As the investigation stalls, the eminent Dr. Thorndyke digs into the case. The story sets up the mystery nicely and indeed provides enough information to the reader to infer how the disappearance occurred and who or what facilitated it. The book is one of the best whodunits that I’ve ever read. The Mystery of Edwin Drood by Charles Dickens - His final work remains unfinished as he passed away before he could complete it. Further complicating the meta-story is that he also didn’t outline the ending nor even put to paper the “villain” of the story. The meta-mystery of the ending has motivated a mountain of speculation around the ending including dozens of continuations of the story from other authors, all deriving their pet endings from textual hints, accounts from Dickens’ friends, illustration notes, and even in some cases seances supposedly accompanied by the spirit of Dickens himself. What was written by Dickens is spectacular and a compelling mystery and although it would be great to know the resolution, in some ways the “Droodiana” that has cropped up over the past 150+ years is reason enough for it to remain a mystery. The whole lore around Edwin Drood is a worthwhile hobby in itself and well-worth exploring. The Chiltern Library edition of the book contains the story and a good bit of the lore around the writing and the meta-works available at the time of its publication. 4 The Shadow People by Margaret St. Clair - Sadly out of print and difficult to find, but I’ve had it on my shelves for decades and finally got around to reading it. The book came onto my radar in the 1980s when I learned about it in the appendix-n of the 1st edition Advanced D&D Dungeon Masters Guide. I enjoyed many of the books at the time and have slowly swung around to re-reading them over the past few years. Sadly, most on the list do not stand the test of time for me, but St. Clair’s mixture of 60s counter-cultural leanings in a fantasy/sf world still works. The cultural touch-points in the book feel quite dated, but despite the occasional awkwardness, the story is unique even today. Lolly Willowes by Sylvia Townsend Warner - The book started as a passable novel of manners focused on a turn of the century British middle-class family. The titular character was mostly background decoration for the first third of the novel and AFAIR was talked about only in the third-person. It’s only when she made the choice to move out on her own to the country 5 in her middle age does she gain a central role in the narrative and her inner thoughts revealed. This is where things really pick up because I was shocked to learn that this unassuming woman’s inner thoughts had a delicious darkness to them. I don’t want to give away too much, but I’ll just say that you will not expect how the story ends. Patience by Daniel Clowes - A profound graphic novel using time-travel to explore the idea of enduring love with a story that proceed through time, following Jack as he tries to alter the past and save the woman he loves. This well-known science fiction motif is elevated by Clowes’ signature psychological complexity. Narcissus and Goldmund by Herman Hesse - I’ve read most of the books by Hermann Hesse but this one escaped my attention until this year. The story follows the parallel lives of a monk Narcissus and his passionate friend Goldmund as they respectively search for meaning in life through spiritual means and through pleasures of the flesh. We Who Are About To… by Joanna Russ - A small group of astronauts crash land on a hostile alien world and quickly realize that rescue is unlikely to come. Many SF stories have started this way and so the expectation is that this is a colonization story… but Russ thrives on subverting reader expectations. Fifty Forgotten Records by R.B. Russell - Another lovely entry in Russell’s series (one can hope) of autobiographical explorations of art, so far covering literature and now music. This book describes 50 records of varying popularity and Russell’s personal connections to each. While I certainly enjoyed finding a dozen or so new albums to explore, the true triumph of the book lies in the vulnerable, reflective memoir threaded throughout. The Way of All Flesh by Samuel Butler *A novel that follows 4-generations of the Ponitifex family, with a particular bildungsromanesque thread around Ernest, a young man who’s naivete leads to his downfall and how his life unfolds thereafter. 6 Number of books written or published As I mentioned, I have taken to writing more on non-technical t
