---
id: 557
url: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1993/02/22/beverly-hills-hotel-paradise-lost
title: The Man Who Spent Forty-two Years at the Beverly Hills Hotel Pool | The New
  Yorker
domain: www.newyorker.com
source_date: '2025-02-26'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- news
summary: Irving V. Link spent 42 years (1950-1992) at the Beverly Hills Hotel pool,
  where he maintained a meticulously ordered daily routine of swimming, playing gin
  rummy with Hollywood celebrities, and conducting business while exemplifying a uniquely
  glamorous Los Angeles lifestyle. When the Sultan of Brunei closed the hotel in December
  1992 for renovations, Irving lost the exclusive world he had cultivated, forcing
  him to reinvent his life at age 87. The article portrays Irving as a legendary figure
  who, despite never learning to swim, became an aesthetic icon of Los Angeles culture—a
  man who had perfected the art of living well.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Man Who Spent Forty-two Years at the Beverly Hills Hotel Pool | The New Yorker

Save this story Save this story Save this story Save this story Illustration by Jean-Philippe Delhomme Until just a few weeks ago, no American seemed on better terms with fortune than Irving V. Link, who had spent most of the past half century playing gin rummy by the side of the pool at the Beverly Hills Hotel, in Los Angeles. For forty-two years, from the time he discovered the hotel, in 1950, until it closed, last December 30th, Irving’s days had been as well ordered and as predictable as the Sun King’s. At seven o’clock every morning, wearing one of the many perfectly fitted tropical-weight suits that have been a special affection of his since a memorable day in the nineteen-thirties, he would stroll over from his house, in the lower reaches of Beverly Hills; enter the hotel under the long, sloping green-and-white striped awning that extended all the way from the driveway, above Sunset Boulevard, to the main entrance; turn right in the lobby; and arrive at the Polo Lounge. Often he and the hostess, Bernice Philbin, would be the first two people there, and they would have a polite conversation before Irving took his place in his booth—the first half circle to your left as you came in—and ordered breakfast: scrambled eggs back in the days when people ate eggs, and, more recently, banana and granola with skim milk. Occasionally, when the weather was particularly fine, he would take his breakfast outside, under the great Brazilian peppertree on the curving flagstone Polo Lounge patio. Then, at around nine, he would stroll back through the lobby and follow the curving, carpeted stairs down to the lower hallway, where he would stop to say good morning to all the people in the downstairs shops: to Tony, the barber, for instance, who would just be laying out his razors and scissors, and Amir, the haberdasher, who specialized in cashmere coats with chinchilla linings, and who would often be at work on a new suit for Irving. Then Irving would walk out through the glass door at the end of the hallway into the allée of jacarandas and bougainvilleas that led to the Beverly Hills Hotel pool. He would wave good morning to Sven Peterson and his pool crew, who would be scrutinizing visitors from the safety of a small, tollhouse-style booth, and walk down the concrete steps toward the pool itself. One of the pool boys would scamper ahead to “set up” a chaise for Irving—that is, drape a flamingo-colored towel over the chair’s buff-colored vinyl—on the south, or sunny, side of the pool while Irving went over to his cabana, on the opposite side, to change into his swimming trunks. Then he would sunbathe for a few hours on the chaise. At noon, Irving would retire again to his cabana and change for lunch, which he would occasionally eat under an umbrella-shaded table in the Patio Club, or sometimes at the Bistro Garden, on Canon Drive, a favorite spot of his. After lunch, Irving would return to the cabana, change again—usually into what is called “resort wear”—and set up a table just outside for the gin game. On any reasonably sunny day, the pool would by then be echoing with the names of well-known people being called to the phone, as well as with the names of unknown people being called to the phone by themselves in the forlorn hope that one day this would help them become well known, too. From his vantage in front of his cabana, Irving could not only watch the parade go by but get the parade to sit down with him and play cards. Over the years, his gin game included Hollywood luminaries ranging from Tony Martin to such lesser figures as Ken Berg, the Koo-Koo-Roo King. Irving is an inordinately polite man, and words like “starlets,” “moguls,” and “kibitzers” never cross his lips; the world he saw was one in which, as he put it, “magnificent-looking young women, full of theatrical drive,” lay on chaises in order to impress many of the astute businessmen who had decided to “take a fling in the picture business.” All through the day, Irving’s own business—a hard-to-follow mixture of liquor distribution, real-estate deal making, and all-around middleman stuff—would be unhurriedly intertwined with all his other activities, like creepers rising on a trellis. Irving would play cards until sunset. Most days, in fact, he and Sven closed the pool together. Then Irving would either walk back home to his wife and two children, or, after his wife died, in 1990, change yet again, and have dinner at the Bistro Garden. Except for a brief period in the early sixties—when Irving, through no fault of his own, became trapped in the contest between Bobby Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa and was in effect banished for a while by Kennedy from the Polo Lounge—one day of Irving’s has been almost exactly like the next. By the end of 1992, he had spent approximately fifteen thousand days by the side of the pool. (Irving has never learned how to swim.) “I guess I’m a creature of habit,” he says. In recent years, people would come by the pool and ask to meet Irving, just so they could say that they had at last met a man who had it all figured out. His circle of admirers, probably larger than that of any other man who has spent his days by the side of a pool, extended from the pool boys (“I’m in awe of him,” one of them said the week before Christmas, watching Irving sun himself on an icy Southern California morning. “He’s what—ninety?” Eighty-seven, actually. “And he’s sunproof. He’s cancer-proof. What does he do? How does he make his money? How does he do it?”) all the way to Richard Koshalek, the director of the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, who has admired Irving from an aesthetic distance, as though he were a Diebenkorn seascape. “It’s one of the great performance pieces in Los Angeles history,” Koshalek says. “He exemplifies something important about L.A., which is that the fragmentation of the city, which everyone always decries, also means that there are these remarkable subcultures all around, where people with very specific, amazing plumage flourish.” Last December 30th, however, the Sultan of Brunei, who has owned the Beverly Hills Hotel since 1988, decided to close it—for reasons that are either sensible and as plain as day, if you ask people who work for the Sultan now, or murky and irrational, if you ask people who were working for him up until December 30th. Officially, the hotel will be closed for renovations for two years—“twenty-four months” is the formula the Sultan’s people prefer—but there are people who think that it may be closed much longer, or even for good. Irving now has to figure out another way of spending his days: Louis XIV expelled from Versailles and shuffling back and forth among other guys’ châteaux. “The Sultan is the only owner of the hotel in the past forty years who has not been a close personal friend of mine,” Irving said one morning in the last week of December, as he sat at breakfast in the now nearly empty Polo Lounge. “Manny Borenstein, Ben Silberstein, Marvin Davis—I played cards with them all. I wish the Sultan and I might have sat down together. My experience with potentates is larger than you might think. I once had a maharaja as a warm personal friend. Now, observing the Sultan’s policy, I’d say that he is a very astute businessman.” Irving toyed, a little sadly, with his banana and granola. “And in the long run what we all have to believe is that this sabbatical will prove to be an extremely astute move, and that we’ll all be grateful when we recommence in two years. If it is astute, however, I don’t yet grasp how it’s astute. I run the figures through my head very often, and the project doesn’t cost out in terms of what he paid, what he’ll have to invest, and how hard it will be to reassemble this—this magnificent cast of characters and memories and associations.” He stared out the floor-to-ceiling windows at the peppertree, dominating the abandoned Polo Lounge patio. Then he went on, “Of course, what we’re all learning—” By “we,” Irving meant the hotel regulars, who are now being dispossessed—a group for which he serves as a sort of unpaid, ex-officio chairman, and on all of whom he has bestowed royal titles: Sven Peterson the Pool Prince, Bernice Philbin the Queen of the Polo Lounge, Chris Dunn the Crown Prince of Parking. “What we’re all learning is something new. Which is that if you’re a sultan it really doesn’t matter how astute you are. If you’re a sultan, you get to do whatever you want to do. Astuteness is somehow not your problem in life.” Irving is one part Meyer Wolfshiem, one part Colonel Stingo, and eight parts everything your grandfather in Fort Lauderdale would dream of being if only he could get loose from your grandmother. He is certainly the best-dressed eighty-seven-year-old in America. He is slim, has beautiful, almost silver-white hair, a dashing white mustache, which recalls those of the rakish leading men of the forties—Cesar Romero or Douglas Fairbanks, Jr.—and a wardrobe that extends into new vistas of rococo elegance every time you see him. His appreciation of fine clothes is mostly untouched by narcissism. Spying an old friend just arrived at the hotel and wearing, let’s say, a white linen suit with a blue shirt and a flowered Liberty print tie—nothing much at all, really—Irving, dressed in a black cashmere Edwardian coat, chocolate kid gloves, and a camel’s-hair scarf, might pause before crossing the lobby and, after a warm handshake, say, “I didn’t want to come over too quickly. I was having too much pleasure in admiring that wonderful suit you’re wearing, and observing how perfectly you’ve accessorized it.” On the Tuesday of that last week, I met Irving at the hotel (we had become friends several years before), got into his gold Lexus, and drove off with him to have lunch at the Bistro Garden. On the drive, which, in the best Beverly Hills tradition, took us eight blocks, Irving began to hum. “Oh, the days dwindle down to a precious few,” he sang under his breath as we wait
