---
id: 520
url: https://www.avclub.com/they-might-be-giants-interview-set-list-part-1-dont-lets-start
title: 'They Might Be Giants interview: the songs that defined their career'
domain: www.avclub.com
source_date: '2025-03-24'
tags:
- music
- video
summary: In this interview, They Might Be Giants' John Linnell and John Flansburgh
  reflect on their early career and breakthrough hits, including how they first met
  in high school through their shared love of punk and new wave music. The duo discuss
  their initial recordings and reveal that they initially underestimated "Don't Let's
  Start," their breakout single, considering it a weak pop song and even moving it
  toward the end of their debut album before radio stations and an iconic music video
  propelled it to success. The interview explores how the band's early works and the
  mentorship of friends like Chris Butler shaped their distinctive sound and career
  trajectory.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# They Might Be Giants interview: the songs that defined their career

They Might Be Giants' record label wanted them to start a dance craze In part one of our Set List interview, TMBG reflect on not recognizing the breakout potential of "Don't Let's Start" and other early-career memories. By Will Harris | March 22, 2025 | 12:00pm Images clockwise from bottom left: Screenshot: YouTube; Lynn Goldsmith/Corbis/VCG via Getty Images; Screenshot: YouTube Music Features they might be giants Copy to clipboard × Copy Link Facebook X Reddit Bluesky Email 0 In Set List, we talk to veteran musicians about some of their most famous songs, learning about their lives and careers in the process, and maybe hearing a good backstage anecdote or two. This is part one of our interview with They Might Be Giants; you can read part two here . The artists: They Might Be Giants have proven themselves to be many things over the course of their multi-decade career—why, they might even be Dr. Spock’s backup band!—but one thing that they have consistently been is fun, offering up a diverse musical palate combined with lyrics that are sometimes educational and sometimes utterly inscrutable. They’re also extremely prolific, so to delve into their discography and try to cover a significant chunk of it was a Herculean task, but John Linnell and John Flansburgh were kind enough to do a lengthy Zoom interview with The A.V. Club and tackle as many songs from throughout their existence as we could squeeze into one interview. We kicked things off with a song that was actually recorded by Linnell before he and Flansburgh first teamed up. The Mundanes, “Make It The Same” (1980) John Linnell : [Surprised.] Oh! Okay… The A.V. Club: From what I can tell, John, that seems to have been your first release committed to vinyl. JL : I guess so, yeah. The Mundanes was a New Wave band. I was just a band member, not really one of the leaders of the band. We’d been together for about a year, and we put out a single, a 45 RPM single with three cuts on it. We squeezed two short cuts on one side of it and one on the other. My contribution was Farfisa organ and Moog synthesizer, which were also the instruments that John Flansburgh and I started using when we first started making our recordings. We had this leftover gear from being in The Mundanes, and it was kind of like the New Wave starter kit, those instruments. AVC: So how did you two first cross paths? JL : Well, you wanna tell the story, Flans? John Flansburgh : Oh, I can’t remember. [Laughs.] Well, we went to the same grammar school, but John’s a year older than me, so as George Harrison will remind everyone, that’s a huge difference. We didn’t really become friends until high school and we were sort of running in a clique of kids who all worked at the newspaper. It’s not that different from being like theater kids; it’s like an affinity group as much as it was a working newspaper. AVC: How did you discover your musical bond? JF : Well, we had a lot of musical experiences and we had a good friend, James McIntyre, who turned us on to a ton of music. He was kind of like the Lester Bangs of Lincoln Sudbury Regional High School. And he was just a really colorful guy. I don’t know if he played you the Ramones record first, Linnell… JL : Yep. JF : …but he played me the Ramones in his attic bedroom, and it was like one of those things where hearing the Ramones was a lot closer to hearing either Laurie Anderson or Motorhead or maybe a combination of both. There was something kind of unbelievable about the Ramones. I think that was the thing about punk rock/new wave, the emerging thing that we now think of as alternative music. Rock was notable in a lot of different ways, but there was something extra new and extra unbelievable about the things we were getting used to and we just had that shared experience. Some of it was listening to the same music, some of it was going to the same shows. We saw a lot of shows together. “Everything Right Is Wrong” (from 1985’s Wiggle Diskette ) AVC: So what was the first thing you recorded as They Might Be Giants? Because it looks like it was “Everything Right Is Wrong.” JL : Yeah, that was the first thing we put out. I think before we made that flexi-disc, we made a bunch of recordings. John and I recorded together when we were teenagers, before there was any idea of getting a band together. We did a lot of recording projects, I believe, in your childhood bedroom. But then after that, I had a rehearsal space when I was in The Mundanes, and John brought his tape recorder in and we did a bunch of recordings just in that rehearsal room. As I recall, I think we did a cover of a Soupy Sales song called “ That Wasn’t No Girl You Saw Me With .” JF : Oh, right. That was that Beatles exploitation song. For people who don’t know who Soupy Sales is, which might be everyone reading this, I guess Soupy Sales is most famous for being the father of the Sales Brothers, who were the rhythm section on Iggy Pop’s “Lust For Life.” But Soupy Sales was sort of a New York City children’s entertainer and kind of a notable nutball. AVC: I didn’t realize until today that, per the flexi, Chris Butler [of The Waitresses] did the programming. JF : No, he didn’t do the programming. He lent us his drum machine! [Laughs.] But the thing about that: I have to give Chris incredible credit because, at the time, the drum machine he had cost in those year’s dollars, I think $2,000. So it was almost like lending someone your Lamborghini. “Here’s my incredibly fancy thing, You guys take it.” He didn’t really know us that well; he was just a very generous guy. He really dug our scene, artistically. I mean, he knew the guys from DEVO when they were a local band in Akron, Ohio. He was not a stranger to small-town weirdo music. He was a real booster. I’d have to say he was kinder to us than I’ve ever been to anybody. I have to shout out to Chris Butler—he’s a cool dude. “Don’t Let’s Start” (from 1986’s They Might Be Giants ) AVC: Setting aside the flexi-disc, “Don’t Let’s Start” was officially your first single, right? JF : Yeah, it was a weird story. Like a lot of bands that have a song break out, it really wasn’t coming from us. Part of that had to do with how “Don’t Let’s Start” entered our repertoire; it was one of the last things we had recorded for the record, but I don’t think we had that much regard for it. JL : Actually, we had a discussion about where it belonged on the record, and I felt it was so not strong enough that we moved it to later [on the album]. It was going to be the first track, and we thought, “No, no, no, let’s just move it further back,” and we put “Everything Right Is Wrong” on the top. JF : Its commercial life can really be linked directly to these two commercial radio stations in Pittsburgh and Long Island. JL : My concern was that the song didn’t have the sort of mission statement that we were hoping to get across. And that, instead, it was just a poppy melody. Also, I think I was embarrassed that it was borrowing this sort of Britishism by phrasing it “Don’t let’s start.” It felt a little mannered to me. JF : I’ve never thought of “Don’t let’s start” like a Britishism. JL : Well, the grammar isn’t typically American. So I think I felt a twinge of, oh, this is weird, me putting on a fake accent kind of feeling about it. So that was part of my lack of confidence in it. In a way, it really gelled with Adam Bernstein’s video. I feel like that was the thing that made it into a salable product. We were lucky to team up with Bernstein. Although, now I’m remembering that was not the first thing we did. That was “[Put Your Hand Inside The] Puppet Head,” wasn’t it? JF : Yeah, we came out with that video first. But that was sort of emblematic of how little [we believed in it]. It was not at all clear to us that “Don’t Let’s Start” would be the song that it ended up being. “Ana Ng” (from 1988’s Lincoln ) JL : Well, what a difference a year makes! We had kind of established ourselves—we had an album and we had started touring. I think we just suddenly felt like we were already in the slipstream by that time and we were well into gigging all over the place when we started planning the second album and recording it. I remember the story about “Ana Ng” was [I had] this idea of putting a noise gate across Flans’ guitar, and I think I was doing a very bad job of explaining to him what I wanted to do. I think this is a thing between us. I would say, “‘Let’s put a noise gate on the guitar!” And John would not understand the point of that. It wasn’t until we got into the studio and started doing it that he would say, “Oh, this is what it is!” And this kind of defines this whole sound that was startlingly different to recording a guitar. I felt like even if you didn’t know who we were and didn’t care about the words or anything, it had this sound. Like a jagged, knife-edgy guitar that was distinctive. Now, John, was that the one we got on the CMJ charts with, or had that already happened? JF : Oh, I have no idea. AVC: It was definitely the first one to hit the Billboard Modern Rock chart. JF : It was sort of a parallel experience of people [making the band] an exponentially bigger deal, kind of like “Don’t Let’s Start.” We went from playing for 35 people to playing to 200 people in the week “Don’t Let’s Start” hit MTV; that was kind of like the ignition moment. I’m not sure what we thought the other big songs from Lincoln were, but it’s weird to me that it was put out as an advance single, which I think the common wisdom is that those things are not mutually agreed on. Maybe it was sort of a head-fake from [record label] Bar/None, like, “And by the way, there’s even bigger bangers in the chamber!” There certainly weren’t, but it really jumped out. AVC: Whose idea was it to record the female voice for “I don’t want the world, I just want your half”? JL : Oh, that was Flansburgh. We were in this tiny little studio in New York, and this is often the way it works, [as was] the case with “P
