---
id: 146
url: https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2025/11/11/what-really-happened-with-the-cia-and-the-paris-review-a-conversation-with-lance-richardson/
title: 'What Really Happened with the CIA and The Paris Review?: A Conversation with
  Lance Richardson by Dan Piepenbring'
domain: www.theparisreview.org
source_date: '2025-11-14'
tags:
- nonfiction-book
- news
- politics
summary: The Paris Review's co-founder Peter Matthiessen was revealed in 1977 to have
  been a CIA operative during the magazine's early years in Paris, sparking decades
  of speculation about whether the CIA influenced the publication. In a new biography,
  author Lance Richardson clarifies that Matthiessen joined the CIA primarily for
  practical reasons—seeking a stipend and an excuse to live in Paris as a young writer—rather
  than ideological motivations, and found no evidence the agency actually used him
  to influence the magazine's editorial direction. However, the specifics of Matthiessen's
  CIA work remain largely unclear, as he left the agency in 1953 but never disclosed
  details about his assignments.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# What Really Happened with the CIA and The Paris Review?: A Conversation with Lance Richardson by Dan Piepenbring

Peter Matthiessen in New York City, 1961. Photograph by Ben Martin/Getty Images. When Peter Matthiessen’s name comes up in conjunction with The Paris Review , two facts are sure to emerge. The first is that Matthiessen was one of the magazine’s founders, and that his enchantingly shabby Paris apartment provided a bumptious gathering place in its earliest days. The second is that he was, at the time, an undercover CIA operative, and that the creation of the magazine was somehow wrapped up in his spycraft. The New York Times revealed Matthiessen’s CIA affiliation in a bombshell 1977 story with the headline “ Worldwide Propaganda Network Built by the C.I.A ,” which examined dozens of publications and cultural organizations that had been secretly “owned, subsidized or influenced in some way by the C.I.A. over the past three decades.” Matthiessen’s connection rated only three brief sentences buried at the center of what he called a “long gray article”; the reporter, John Crewdson, noted that there was no evidence the CIA had used the writer “to influence the Paris Review .” Even so, Matthiessen spent the rest of his life facing questions about his role. He had left the agency in 1953, after about two years, but he never divulged the details of his work for the organization, which remain unclear even now, eleven years after his death. Some have speculated that the Review itself received CIA support as part of the agency’s broader effort to prop up pro-Western art and literature. At the peak of its influence, in the fifties and sixties, the CIA fronted money to support a broad array of cultural production, from the seemingly innocuous to the expressly anti-communist. Among many other ventures, it had its hand in abstract-expressionist painting, jazz, Radio Free Asia, literary magazines, academic books on Finland and East Germany, a Roman newspaper, and an animated film adaptation of Animal Farm . While some artists were aware of the source of their funding, many were not. Given that The Paris Review portrayed itself as studiously apolitical—recall William Styron’s famous anti-manifesto in the first issue, fashioning it as a home for “the non-drumbeaters and non-axe-grinders”—Matthiessen’s CIA involvement has raised questions and eyebrows since its revelation in the seventies. Lance Richardson’s True Nature: The Pilgrimage of Peter Matthiessen is the first biography of the writer. Matthiessen, born in New York in 1927, was the author of ten novels, two collections of stories, and nearly two dozen works of nonfiction; he is the only writer to have won the National Book Award for both fiction (for Shadow Country , in 2008) and nonfiction (for The Snow Leopard , in 1980). A keen observer of the natural world, he traveled widely in Africa, Latin America, and the Caribbean in search of remote places where one could find a “glimpse of the earth’s morning,” as he described it. True Nature offers a deft assessment of his work and a capacious telling of the forces that shaped his interest in everything from Zen Buddhism to environmentalism to cryptozoology to labor rights. Richardson conducted hundreds of interviews over seven and a half years, and his archival research yielded, among many other insights, a clearer picture of The Paris Review ’s first years, when Matthiessen was doing double duty as a fiction editor and a secret agent. I spoke to Richardson by phone to ask what he’d discovered about Matthiessen’s years in Paris. INTERVIEWER What do we know about why Peter Matthiessen decided to join the CIA—the decision that led, eventually, to the founding of The Paris Review ? LANCE RICHARDSON Before he died, in anticipation of a possible memoir, Matthiessen wrote out a series of narratives about what he’d been doing in Paris. The title of one of them is “THE PARIS REVIEW V. THE CIA: My Half-life as a Capitalist Running Dog.” They were incomplete, and I had to be careful about assuming everything was one hundred percent accurate—not because Peter was necessarily trying to leave a trail of lies or anything, but because he was writing this decades after it happened, and he had his own agenda. In terms of other materials, the CIA wouldn’t give me anything. I filed FOIA requests. I talked to their entertainment liaison, who works with Hollywood. But they don’t declassify personnel records. As Matthiessen tells it, he had finished Yale in 1950 and wanted to be a writer, but how do you just become a writer? His English professor Norman Holmes Pearson tapped him on the shoulder and asked if he wanted to do something for his country. This was happening quite a lot at Yale at the time. One of Matthiessen’s contemporaries estimated that two dozen of their classmates were recruited for the CIA through various professors. The agency called them the “P source,” for “professor.” Matthiessen wrote that Pearson opened him “like an oyster.” Not because he was ideologically driven—his politics at that point were unformed and chaotic—but because he wanted a stipend and an excuse to go to Paris, which was a city that he and his first wife, Patsy Southgate, really loved. The CIA then was reputationally much more benign, at least domestically. It hadn’t yet become known by most Americans for its involvement in coups and things like that. INTERVIEWER They were active in Korea, Guatemala, and Iran in those years, arranging paramilitary operations and working, in the last case, to bring the shah back to power, though as you say none of that had come to light. At this point, then, they were into election interference and some psyops, but no exploding cigars and mind-control experiments yet? RICHARDSON Right. They sent Matthiessen first to D.C. to meet with James Angleton, a now-famous spymaster who at that time headed up the agency’s Office of Special Operations, which handled foreign intelligence, counterintelligence, and espionage. Then Matthiessen went to spycraft training in New York, which he called “great fun,” and he got on a boat to Paris in 1951. He stumbled into this world of espionage as an excuse to write a novel and be in a city that he associated with freedom. INTERVIEWER Do you think Matthiessen’s time in the navy, during the final stages of World War II, may have motivated him to join the CIA? RICHARDSON Absolutely. He was at the Hotchkiss School during the war, in high school, and he would watch a lot of the young men slightly older than him go off to fight. He saw it as a rite of passage, a badge of honor. By the time it was his turn, when he was doing basic training in Sampson, New York, V-J Day happened. So he missed out. His letters to his girlfriends at the time are really conflicted. He was happy the war was over, but he also felt that he’d been denied something. Eventually, toward the end of 1945, he got sent off anyway, to Hawaii. His job was to do the laundry of the real soldiers who were being demobilized and sent home. He felt incredibly emasculated by this. There’s one point in his notes for his memoir when he says, and I’m paraphrasing here, that he saw joining the CIA as another opportunity to make up for something he had been denied during the war. INTERVIEWER His apartment in Paris, at 14, rue Perceval, was integral to the romance of the early days of The Paris Review —a kind of midcentury bohemian, glass-walled paradise where they threw all these parties. It was heated with lumps of coal dust, and there was a huge painting of a cat’s head on the wall. What was his life like in Paris? RICHARDSON In an article Gay Talese wrote for Esquire in 1963 about those early days of the magazine, he called the apartment “a monstrous fishbowl.” But those parties, and that bohemian lifestyle, were just one aspect of Matthiessen’s life. He would take the metro to meet his CIA handler in the Jeu de Paume, and they would stroll from the museum to the gardens near the Louvre and discuss his assignments. What he was actually working on for the CIA is still opaque. Matthiessen described it later as “deceiving people” and “serial lying.” Until the CIA releases its files, it’s always going to be a bit shadowy. I assume he was spying on other expat Americans, his friends. That’s probably why he was always cagey about it—the shame he felt about doing that. INTERVIEWER Matthiessen wrote about cultivating a source he dubbed “Monsieur X,” whom he called “a near fanatic” and “a veteran Communist agitator.” But there was speculation that he could’ve been spying on the novelist Richard Wright as well, right? RICHARDSON I would not have been surprised if he was reporting on Wright. Wright was being watched at the time by the CIA. And then Matthiessen turns up in Paris around the same time, and they have an overlapping social circle. It seems unlikely to me that he wouldn’t have reported back about Wright. INTERVIEWER What led him from spying to starting a magazine? RICHARDSON The problem with Matthiessen’s cover soon became clear—the labor of a writer is pretty invisible to the outside world. It looks like we’re just sitting inside and not doing anything at all. Matthiessen’s handler told him he needed a visible profession. And one day in one of the cafés he runs into Harold “Doc” Humes, another American who was running a magazine called the Paris News Post , which he had acquired for six hundred bucks, because that was the trend among expats in postwar Paris. Everyone had a little magazine going in that time—there was Merlin , Points , Zero. Humes was a real character, a bit of a loose cannon. He was wearing a cape when Matthiessen saw him at the café that day. He brought on Matthiessen as his fiction editor. But Matthiessen saw the Paris News Post as a lightweight endeavor. He suggested one day to Doc that they flick it off and make something better. Doc jumped at the idea—or, if you take his word for it, it was really his idea, and he planted it in Matthiessen’s head. Peter didn’t want to be the top editor, so he phoned up his friend George Pli
