---
id: 915
url: https://www.ethanhein.com/wp/2019/why-cant-you-tune-your-guitar/
title: Why can’t you tune your guitar? – The Ethan Hein Blog
domain: www.ethanhein.com
source_date: '2026-03-09'
tags:
- music
- physics
- tutorial
summary: Guitars can't be perfectly tuned across all notes because of mathematical
  relationships between frequencies. The Western tuning system is based on the harmonic
  series—the natural overtones produced by vibrating strings—which uses ratios of
  small prime numbers (2, 3, and 5) to generate pleasing note combinations. However,
  these mathematical ratios don't align perfectly across all twelve notes of the chromatic
  scale, making it impossible to tune a guitar so that every interval sounds equally
  consonant.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Why can’t you tune your guitar? – The Ethan Hein Blog

Short answer: because math. Longer answer: because prime numbers don’t divide into each other evenly. To understand what follows, you need to know some facts about the physics of vibrating strings: When you pluck a guitar string, it vibrates to and fro. You can tell how fast the string is vibrating by listening to the pitch it produces. Shorter and higher-tension strings vibrate faster and make higher pitches. Longer and lower-tension strings vibrate slower and make lower pitches. The scientific term for the rate of the string’s vibration is its frequency. You measure frequency in hertz (Hz) , a unit that just means “vibrations per second.” The standard tuning pitch, 440 Hz , is the pitch you hear when an object (like a tuning fork or guitar string) vibrates to and fro 440 times per second. Strings can vibrate in many different ways at once. In addition to the entire length of the string bending back and forth, the string can also vibrate in halves, in thirds, in quarters, and so on. These vibrations of string subsections are called harmonics (or overtones, or partials, they all mean the same thing.) If you watch slow-motion video of a guitar string vibrating, you’ll see a complex, evolving blend of squiggles. These squiggles are the mathematical sum of all of the string’s different harmonics. The weird and interesting thing about harmonics is that each one produces a different pitch. So when you play a note, you’re actually hearing many different pitches at once. It’s not difficult to isolate the harmonics of a vibrating string and hear their individual pitches. Harmonics are very useful for tuning your guitar – here’s a handy guide for doing so . They are also the basis of the whole Western tuning system generally. The math of harmonics is really simple As a string vibrates, its longer subsections produce lower and louder harmonics, while its shorter subsections produce higher and quieter harmonics. Click the image below to hear the first six harmonics of a string: Remember that in a real-world string, you are hearing all these harmonics blended together. However, you can isolate the harmonics of a guitar string by lightly touching it in certain places to deaden some of the vibrations. If you touch the vibrating string at its halfway point, that deadens the vibration along the string’s entire length, enabling you to hear it vibrating in halves. If you touch the string a third of the way along its length, that deadens the vibration both of the entire string and the halves of the string, so you can now hear it vibrating in thirds. If you touch the string a quarter of the way along its length, that deadens the vibration of the whole string, the halves, and the thirds, so you can now hear it vibrating in quarters. Harmonics give you a good-sounding collection of pitches Imagine that you have a guitar string tuned to play a note called “middle C,” which has a frequency of 1 Hz. (In reality, middle C has a frequency of 261.626 Hz, so if you want to think in terms of actual frequencies, just multiply all the numbers in the following paragraphs by 261.626.) The first harmonic is the string vibrating along its entire length, otherwise known as the fundamental frequency. When we say that your C string is vibrating at 1 Hz, that really means that its fundamental has a frequency of 1 Hz. The other harmonics all have other frequencies, and we’ll get to those, but the fundamental is usually the loudest harmonic, and it’s usually the only one you’re aware of hearing. The second harmonic is the one you get from the string vibrating in halves. Each half of the string vibrates at twice the frequency of the whole string. The 2:1 relationship between the pitches of the first and second harmonics is called an octave . (I know that the word suggests the number eight, not the number two. Don’t worry about it.) The pitch that’s an octave above middle C has a frequency of 2 Hz, and it is also called C. Both of these notes have the same letter name because in Western convention, notes an octave apart from each other are considered to be “ the same note “. The important concept here is that you can move up an octave from any pitch by doubling its frequency. You can also move down an octave from any pitch by halving its frequency. The third harmonic is the one you get from the string vibrating in thirds. Its frequency is three times the fundamental frequency. Since your C string’s fundamental is 1 Hz, the third harmonic has a frequency of 3 Hz, and it produces a note called G. The interval between C and G is called a perfect fifth , for reasons having nothing to do with harmonics. I know it’s confusing. The fourth harmonic is the one you get from the string vibrating in quarters, at 4 Hz. This note is an octave higher than the second harmonic, and so is also called C. (The eighth harmonic will also play C, as will the sixteenth, and the thirty-second, and all the powers of two up to infinity.) The fifth harmonic is the one you get from the string vibrating in fifths. Its frequency is 5 Hz, and it produces a note called E. The interval between C and E is called a major third , which is another name that has nothing to do with harmonics. There are many more harmonics (infinitely many more, in theory) but these first five are the most audible ones. The ancient Greeks figured out that if you have a set of strings, it sounds really good if you tune them following the pitch ratios from the natural harmonic series. In such tuning systems, you pick a starting frequency, and then multiply or divide it by ratios of whole numbers to generate more frequencies, the same way you figure out the frequencies of a single string’s harmonics. The best-sounding note combinations (to Western people) are the ones derived from the first few harmonics. In other words, you get the nicest harmony (for Western people) when you multiply and divide your frequencies by ratios of the smallest prime numbers: 2, 3, and 5. So, let’s do it. Let’s make a tuning system based on the harmonics of your C string. First, we should find the C, G and E notes whose frequencies are as close to each other as possible. We’ve already got C at 1 Hz. We can bring our G at 3 Hz down an octave by dividing its frequency in half. This gives us a G at 3/2 Hz. We can also bring our E at 5 Hz down two octaves by dividing its frequency in half twice. This gives us an E at 5/4 Hz. When you play 1 Hz, 5/4 Hz and 3/2 Hz at the same time, you get a lovely sound called a C major triad. So far, so good. Let’s find some more notes! We can extend our tuning system by thinking of G as our base note, and looking at its harmonics. When we do, we get two new notes. The third harmonic of G is D at 9 Hz. (Thanks to octave equivalency, we can also make Ds at 9/2 Hz, and 9/4 Hz, and 9/8 Hz, and 18 Hz, and 36 Hz, and so on.) The fifth harmonic of G is B at 15 Hz. (There are also Bs at 15/2 Hz, and 30 Hz, and so on.) The notes C and G feel closely related to each other because of their shared harmonic relationship. The chords you get from their respective overtone series also feel related. If you alternate between C major and G major chords, it just about always sounds good. Now let’s extend our tuning system further by treating D as our base note. The harmonics of D give us two more new notes: the third harmonic is A at 27 Hz (and 27/2 Hz and 27/4 Hz and 27/8 Hz), and the fifth harmonic is F-sharp at 45 Hz (and 45/2 Hz and 45/4 Hz and 45/8 Hz). G major chords and D major chords have the same relationship as C major and G major chords, and they sound equally good when you alternate them. Also, C major, G major and D major chords all sound good as a group, in any order and any combination. Western people just really like the sound of shared harmonics. Last thing: notice that you can combine the harmonics of C, G and D to form a G major scale. Now let’s make some more notes by treating A as our base and looking at its harmonics. The third harmonic of A is E at 81 Hz (and 81/2 Hz and 81/4 Hz etc). But wait. We already had an E, at 5 Hz. If we put these two E’s in the same octave, then one of them is at 80/64 Hz, and the other is at 81/64 Hz. That may not seem like much of a difference, but even untrained listeners will be able to hear that they are out of tune with each other. Furthermore, if we use the E derived from C, then it will be out of tune with A. However, if we use the E derived from A, then it will be out of tune with C. This is going to be a problem. Let’s forget about that conflict for a second. Instead, we’ll try a different method of expanding our tuning system, by going in the opposite direction from C. Let’s think about a note that contains C in its harmonic series. That would be F at 1/3 Hz. The third harmonic of F is C at 1 Hz, as expected. The fifth harmonic of F is A at 5/3 Hz. Uh oh. This new A conflicts with the one we already had at 27 Hz. That is not good. But let’s bracket that and keep expanding. We can push further left by finding the note whose overtone series contains F. That would be B-flat at 1/9 Hz. Its third harmonic is F at 1/3 Hz, and its fifth harmonic is D at 5/9 Hz. And now we have a new problem: this D clashes with our existing D at 9 Hz. Can you see the pattern here? Anytime you want to use intervals based on third harmonics, you’re multiplying and dividing by 3, but anytime you want to use intervals based on fifth harmonics, you’re multiplying and dividing by 5. (Notice that the conflicting notes always conflict by the same amount, too, a ratio of 81/80 .) Starting from C, it’s possible to produce any note if you multiply or divide your frequencies by 3 enough times, but those notes won’t be in tune with the notes you’d get multiplying or dividing your frequencies by 5, because 3 and 5 don’t mutually divide evenly. This is not just an abstract mathematical issue. It’s the reason that it’s impossible to have a guitar be in tune with itself. Guitars can’t be perfectly in tun
