---
id: 1000
url: https://www.quantamagazine.org/an-arctic-road-trip-brings-vital-underground-networks-into-view-20260406/
title: An Arctic Road Trip Brings Vital Underground Networks into View | Quanta Magazine
domain: www.quantamagazine.org
source_date: '2026-04-08'
tags:
- biology
- academic-paper
- ai
summary: Researchers are conducting fieldwork across Arctic regions and beyond to
  map the global diversity of mycorrhizal fungi—underground fungal networks that play
  a crucial role in regulating carbon storage, nutrient cycling, and ecosystem health.
  Using machine learning analysis of 25,000 soil samples, scientists have identified
  "hot spots" of rare fungal species, with Alaskan tundra being one predicted location,
  where permafrost contains roughly 1 trillion metric tons of carbon—about 10 times
  the amount in the entire Amazon rainforest. As climate change threatens these vital
  underground networks, which store carbon equivalent to over one-third of annual
  global emissions, protecting these fungal systems has become critical for climate
  mitigation and biodiversity conservation.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# An Arctic Road Trip Brings Vital Underground Networks into View | Quanta Magazine

Home An Arctic Road Trip Brings Vital Underground Networks into View Comment Save Article Read Later Share Facebook Copied! Copy link Email Pocket Reddit Ycombinator Comment Comments Save Article Read Later Read Later biodiversity An Arctic Road Trip Brings Vital Underground Networks into View By Max G. Levy April 6, 2026 A vast meshwork of soil-bound fungi governs life aboveground. In Alaska, and at field sites around the world, researchers are racing to understand exactly how, with critical stores of carbon at stake. Comment Save Article Read Later Biologists hammer a steel tube into the ground to collect a soil sample. Dozens of such samples taken from northern Alaska will reveal whether this place is a global hot spot of rare species of mycorrhizal fungi. Max Levy Introduction This story was supported by the Pulitzer Center. O ne Tuesday in June 2025, a white Chevy Suburban set off down the northernmost highway in North America. The sun of Alaska’s polar summer hadn’t set in 40 days, and it wouldn’t set again for another 35. But for Michael Van Nuland, the biologist in the driver’s seat, time was already running out. The SUV, packed with four days of fieldwork essentials — rubber boots for mucking in marshes, GPS for centimeter-level precision, a steel tube for extracting soil cores from permafrost — growled along the Dalton Highway, which sews an asphalt-and-gravel seam through the tundra of Alaska’s northern coast. Through the window, the lack of visible trees suggested a barren landscape, but looks are deceiving. The miles of sedge and duvet-thick moss formed the basis of a feast for seasonal caribou, grizzlies, muskox, and roughly 200 bird species. Van Nuland was more interested in what was happening underground, where sprawling systems of fungal threads — from microscopic ducts to arteries thick as yarn — extended dozens of feet horizontally in all directions. By connecting plant roots and circulating nutrients, this dense, networked scaffold sustained life above the surface. Mycorrhizal fungi grow densely on beech roots. In the late 19th century, botanists assumed that these fungal networks were infectious parasites. “People couldn’t believe that these fungi were actually penetrating into plant cells and not taking something,” said the evolutionary biologist Toby Kiers. Steven Morris/Alamy “Some people just see dirt as dirt. But it’s a living, breathing system,” said Van Nuland , the lead data scientist of the nonprofit Society for the Protection of Underground Networks (SPUN). “The complexity you see in a forest — the layers of canopy, the different species of birds and insects … You’re walking over an equally or possibly even more complex system below ground.” This system’s architect was the subject of Van Nuland’s study: mycorrhizal fungi, a group of evolutionarily far-flung, soil-dwelling microbes whose ever-growing appendages extract nutrients and water from their surroundings. Those surroundings include nearby plants. The fungi’s pale, thread-like “hyphae” burrow through the soil until they find plant roots to connect with. Then, the parties can trade. From the fungus, the plant accepts scarce nitrogen and phosphorus that its own roots struggle to reach; the fungus takes the plant’s carbon to further grow and colonize the soil. Across the century since their discovery, mycorrhizal fungi have been considered parasites of plant roots and, later, passive infrastructure that served plants’ interests. But studies from this decade that used advanced techniques in robotics and imaging suggest that they are active merchants that control their fates and influence the fates of others. The expedition’s cast of intrepid biologists. Clockwise from top left: Michael Van Nuland, Kelcie Walther, Jinsu Elhance, and Mario Muscarella. Max Levy The expedition’s cast of intrepid biologists. From left: Michael Van Nuland, Kelcie Walther, Mario Muscarella, and Jinsu Elhance. Max Levy “You can think of fungi as sort of farming plants above ground,” said Toby Kiers , an evolutionary biologist at Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam and the chief scientist and director of SPUN, which she co-founded in 2021. Mycorrhizal fungi direct traffic through nutrient superhighways and restructure the soil to support life across entire ecosystems. Now, “we see fungi more as really important actors in their own right,” Kiers said. “It’s flipping the way that we understand the underground.” As fungal networks come into focus, one thing that remains little known, especially in comparison with our understanding of plants and animals, is their global biodiversity and biogeography. There are likely between 20,000 and 50,000 species of mycorrhizal fungi, each with its own tricks for tapping into different plants and harvesting nutrients using enzymes, acids, and water-mining structures. To address this gap, in a model published in Nature in 2025 , Van Nuland and his colleagues had used machine learning to process 25,000 soil samples from around the world, producing more than 2.8 billion fungal DNA sequences. They used the data to predict the locations of mycorrhizal “hot spots” — places with both high diversity and rarity of species. That model is what drew Van Nuland to the Arctic. According to the analysis, this stretch of Alaskan tundra, sandwiched between the Prudhoe Bay oil fields and the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, is likely a mycorrhizal hot spot. So Van Nuland brought a team of researchers to sample soil across the region; he and other SPUN researchers will sample more predicted hotspots around the world, including tropical islands, dense forests, and mountains. If these sites harbor rare, unique soil fungi, then each scoop of dirt could reveal new species. A machine-learning algorithm trained on 25,000 geolocated soil samples (right) predicted that the tundra of northern Alaska (left) was a hot spot for rare fungal species. SPUN The group’s findings could have global significance. Every year, the scraggles of mycorrhizal fungi store the equivalent of more than one-third of global carbon emissions . Northern permafrost, including in the Alaskan tundra, locks roughly 1 trillion metric tons of carbon in its top three meters of soil — about 10 times the amount of carbon in the entire Amazon rainforest, above and below the surface. Therefore, protection of these vast fungal networks is a key tool for resisting climate change. “In the past we’ve really neglected to map, monitor, and protect fungal systems,” Kiers said, “and now that’s changing.” But our recognition of mycorrhizae comes late. Climate change is already destabilizing this area. Fungal communities respond to warmer temperatures, increasing moisture, a growing frequency and intensity in wildfires, and thawing permafrost. Less than 10% of SPUN’s predicted mycorrhizal hot spots fall within protected land, and even protected land is not beyond the reach of climate change. To carve out space for soil fungi in protection efforts, he must gather more evidence for his model on the ground and identify rare species that will be affected. That’s why Van Nuland and other researchers have been racing to sample hot spots of mycorrhizal fungi across the world. Without knowing which mycorrhizal characters shoulder our carbon burden, he fears, we will fail to protect them and, as a consequence, ourselves. As they venture to remote places, the scientists are discovering surprising ways in which underground wisps of fungi dictate the future of life aboveground. After pulling off the 414-mile Dalton Highway, which was built in 1974 to supply the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, the research team hikes roughly half a mile to a sample site. Max Levy Laying Groundwork I joined the SPUN team in Deadhorse, an oilfield-support town on the northern coast of Alaska’s North Slope, at 6 a.m. on day three of a four-day, 150-mile tundra expedition. As we rumbled down the Dalton Highway, they caught me up on recent events. Day one began with a flat tire and ended with 10 sites sampled. On day two, the vehicle remained intact and the gang of four researchers bagged 14 more samples of damp, chocolatey marsh dirt. We drove south out of town and parked at a roadside pullout to pick up where the team had left off. During our short hike to the day’s first sample site, Van Nuland kneeled to introduce me to mycorrhizae. He peeled back thick moss next to a dwarf willow shrub and cut out a cold clod of dirt. Holding the excised earth in his palm, he pointed to small white clumps resembling popcorn. “All of these are places where the [mycorrhizal] hyphae are wrapping themselves really intensely around the fine roots,” he said. “Then from this point they’re sending out their hyphal networks.” Hyphae are the individual filaments that make up the fungal body, or mycelium. These fungal tubes are made of rigid cells that contain chitin, the same compound found in insect exoskeletons. They can be impossibly thin. Hyphae are often barely five micrometers wide — about one-tenth the width of a human hair and much narrower than a plant’s root tip. By foraging, burrowing into crevices and tapping into air pockets and moist pools in the soil, hyphae can access nutrients that the shrub cannot. Mycorrhizal hyphae are most visible to the human eye where they wrap in dense bundles around plant roots, visible here as white popcornlike puffs. Max Levy That’s what researchers had assumed, anyway. What happens inside hyphae is invisibly small. The ability to finally see it is revolutionizing the field. In February 2025, Kiers’s team of ecologists joined forces with Tom Shimizu ’s biophysicists from the AMOLF Institute in Amsterdam to robotically track how nutrients flow within hyphae growing in petri dishes. The videos look like time-lapses of urban commutes. Nutrients streamed in both directions through the hyphal tunnels. As the fungi extended more hyphae, the branching network pulsed and gradually expanded into a nutrient-gobbling lace. If the
