---
id: 561
url: https://lcamtuf.substack.com/p/but-good-sir-what-is-electricity
title: But good sir, what is electricity? - lcamtuf’s thing
domain: lcamtuf.substack.com
source_date: '2025-02-24'
tags:
- physics
- tutorial
summary: This article explains the fundamental physics behind electricity by examining
  atomic structure and how different materials conduct or insulate charge. The author
  breaks down how electrons are organized in atomic shells according to quantum mechanics,
  then explains that insulators trap displaced electrons in place, while metals (discussed
  at the end) allow electrons to move freely. The piece is part of an accessible electronics
  curriculum designed for people seeking real explanations without academic jargon
  or advanced math.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# But good sir, what is electricity? - lcamtuf’s thing

But good sir, what is electricity? A quick look at the physics of conductors, insulators, and electric charges. Feb 23, 2025 123 5 5 Share A recurring theme of this Substack are my attempts to build out an accessible curriculum for hobby electronics. The target audience are folks who want real answers, but who aren’t keen on academic textbooks brimming with obtuse jargon and advanced calculus. I’m particularly fond of the following foundational articles: Core concepts in electronic circuits (+ complex impedance ), The physics of semiconductors , Signal amplification funamentals (+ op-amp stability ), RC circuits and analog signal filtering (+ resonant filters ), Radio transmitters and receivers , A relativistic treatment of magnetic fields . Today, I’d like to take a step back and tackle a more basic question that isn’t always satisfactorily answered in high school: what is electricity and what makes certain materials “conduct” it in the first place? The structure of the atom Most readers should be familiar with the basic structure of the atom: a nucleus consisting of neutrons and protons, surrounded by a swarm of electrons that are stratified into a number of “shells”. In pop-science articles and videos, the concept is usually illustrated using the dated but intuitive model developed by Niels Bohr around 1918. The model envisions electrons that travel around the nucleus in circular orbits: The Bohr model of lithium: three protons, four neutrons, three electrons. Today, it’s no longer believed that these electrons zoom around in circles; instead, they appear to settle into oddly-shaped orbitals that represent solutions to an underlying wave function — but don’t map to a trajectory of a discrete particle in classical mechanics. If this sounds cryptic, it’s important to note that things only get worse. We don’t have philosophically satisfying insights into the universe at subatomic scales. We have quantum mechanics: a set of equations that are good at predicting the behavior of elementary particles, but that don’t line up with our intuition about the macroscopic world. We don’t know if the equations are a crude approximation of some deeper, yet-unseen reality; or if the fabric of the universe is just weird math. In fact, the harder we try to come up with intuitive analogies, the more off-base we get. For example, despite what most YouTube educators claim, there’s no straightforward explanation of what the captive electron actually does: it’s not orbiting the nucleus or spinning around its own axis in any conventional sense. Most simply, it just exists as a particular distribution of an electrostatic field in space. In any case, the shape of orbitals is of relatively little significance to electronics; it matters in chemistry because it helps model chemical reactions and predict the properties of materials. For our purposes, it suffices to say that each atom or molecule has a certain number of electrons and that they are organized into a certain number of shells. In the same vein, we don’t need to dwell on the structure of the nucleus. In brief, the nucleus is held together by a powerful but extremely short-range field known as the residual strong force . This force is thought to be a consequence of the make-up of protons and neutrons, each of which appears to be made out of three more exotic elementary particles known as quarks. Pay no mind: it’s enough to say that most nuclei on Earth were formed through nuclear fusion in stars and won’t undergo any change on the timescales of interest to electronics — or to terrestrial life. A more pertinent observation is that the structure of the atom is also shaped by a weaker but far-reaching electrostatic force. The force acts only on certain subatomic particles; these particles are said to be charged. In this specific context, the “charge” is an intrinsic property of a given type of particles and not something they can gain or lose: a proton is always positive, an electron is always negative, and a neutron just doesn’t play along. Similar charges repel and dissimilar charges attract, so protons in the nucleus can pull in an equal number of electrons. The electrons are then captured — bound — by the electrostatic field extending from the nucleus. The result is a stable atom with no net charge. Another important insight from quantum mechanics is that the parameters that describe the state of a bound electron appear to be quantized — that is to say, they only take specific values or change in discrete increments. Once again, we don’t have a satisfying explanation why. We know that these quantum numbers correspond to standing-wave solutions of a three-dimensional wave function that we pulled out of thin air. We also know that the model works better than any alternatives. But we don’t know what any of it really means — or if it means anything. Either way, the bottom line is that there are specific energy levels that an electron in an atom can hop across, with no option to dwell halfway between. This is why we see a progression distinct electron shells, from lowest to highest energies. The remaining conundrum is why don’t all the electrons settle in the most energetically-favorable, innermost shell. The relevant constraint is known as the Pauli exclusion principle . The state of a bound electron is seemingly fully described by a handful of parameters, and the electrons must remain distinct — i.e., their quantum parameters can’t be all the same. This means that each shell has a limited seating capacity: once all the combinations of “lesser” quantum numbers are exhausted, the next electron needs to bump up the remaining variable: the principal quantum number that corresponds to the shell it occupies. Insulators and static charges In most cases, the electrons that populate innermost shells do relatively little: they have low energy, are bound tightly to the nucleus, and tend to be shielded from outside influence. The story is different for higher-energy valence electrons; for example, chemistry as we know it arises from atoms exchanging or sharing these weakly-attached particles. In a covalent bond, some electrons from both participating atoms shift to a newly-formed, energetically-favorable multi-atom orbital. In ionic bonding, one or more electrons migrate from one atom to another. In the latter case, the new molecule is held together by the resulting electrostatic field. Even without chemical bonding, it’s not difficult to temporarily dislodge some valence electrons. The most familiar example is the triboelectric effect that’s responsible for the harmless zaps of static electricity we sometimes feel around the home. The effect isn’t fully understood, but we know that depending on the shape and orientation of molecules, different surfaces exhibit variable affinity to electrons. In part because of this, when two dissimilar materials are brought together, there can be a slight imbalance in the number of electrons that randomly migrate across the boundary. If the pieces are then pulled apart, some charge carriers end up getting stuck where they don’t belong. It should be noted that the scale of this imbalance is minuscule: the displacement of about 10 11 electrons is enough to give you a good zap. This might seem like a big number, but consider that there are roughly 81,000,000,000,000 times as many electrons in a single ounce of table salt. In other words, the magnitude of the phenomenon is comparable to taking a bucket of water out of Lake Erie. This brings us to solid-state insulators: in such materials, valence electrons can still be pulled off or deposited onto the surface with relative ease, but the resulting charges stay in place and can’t propagate through the bulk of the substrate. This is often because there are no suitable vacancies in the shells of nearby molecules. To move around, the electrons would need to be knocked into a higher-energy state. Conduction in metals This situation is different in metals. The atoms form a dense, homogeneous lattice with sparsely-populated orbitals that essentially merge together, extending throughout the material and no longer exhibiting clearly-quantized energy levels that are characteristic of electrons bound to a single nucleus. In this environment, valence electrons are free to skate around the lattice at will. The electrostatic interaction with protons still confines the bulk of the mobile charge carriers to the conductor, but in most other respects, the behavior of a metallic conductor can be modeled as that of a free-flowing electron gas . The key property of conductors is that in contrast to insulators, any static charges can quickly equalize. Consider the scenario shown below, where a single electron is plucked off by an external actor and then injected back on the other side of the wire: Modeling the motion of charges in a metal wire. The remaining electrons promptly scamper away due to electrostatic repulsion; if the process continues, we can observe a steady drift of electrons along the length of the wire. This motion of charges is the flow of electricity. The movement of electrons in a conductor, mediated through electrostatic fields that extend into the surrounding space, can be harnessed to operate electronic components and perform other useful work. It’s important to note that while the charge equalization process is fast, the drift of individual electrons is not. The field propagates close to the speed of light in vacuum (circa 300,000 km/s); individual electrons in a copper wire typically slither at average speeds measured in centimeters per hour or less. A crude analogy is the travel of sound waves in air: if you yell at someone, they will hear you long before any single air molecule makes it from here to there. There are other modes of conduction. In vacuum, thermionic emission can cause thermally-excited electrons to travel significant distances without the need for any medium; in plasma and in highly polar solve
