---
id: 556
url: https://www.noemamag.com/a-radical-new-proposal-for-how-mind-emerges-from-matter
title: Defining Intelligent Life
domain: www.noemamag.com
source_date: '2025-02-27'
tags:
- biology
- academic-paper
- ai
summary: Scientists and philosophers are challenging the traditional definition of
  intelligence by arguing that fundamental intelligent behaviors exist across all
  life forms, not just animals. Recent research shows plants can sense their environment,
  process information, and make strategic decisions—like a plant adjusting its chemical
  defenses based on the size of an attacking caterpillar—suggesting that our understanding
  of intelligence itself may be fundamentally flawed. Rather than continually expanding
  which creatures qualify as intelligent, these researchers propose that redefining
  intelligence could help us better understand life and address our ecological crisis.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Defining Intelligent Life

A Radical New Proposal For How Mind Emerges From Matter If we could stop bickering about which creatures do or don’t deserve to be called smart, an emerging movement of scientists and philosophers argue that we might discover fundamental elements of intelligence that are common to all life. Marina Muun for Noema Magazine Credits Sally Adee is an author and freelance science writer living in London. Her book, “We Are Electric: Inside the 200-Year Hunt for Our Body’s Bioelectric Code, and What the Future Holds,” was published in 2023. Photographs courtesy of the Eden Project. From a snarl of roots that grip dry, shallow soil, the knobbly trunk of an ancient olive tree twisted into a surprisingly lush crown of dense, silvery-green leaves. Far above, the retrofuturistic pattern of a geodesic dome framed the blue sky outside. Dan Ryan considered the tree: “It’s probably close to 1,800 years old.” When it was still a shoot, the Roman Empire was at the height of its influence. Ptolemy was drawing epicycles in a doomed effort to model the paths of the planets and the sun as they revolved around the Earth. For nearly two millennia, this tree managed to evade death by drought or predation or pestilence, forging alliances with alien species in the soil below and the air above. It was humans who almost did it in. When the tree stopped producing olives, the people who owned the land where it lived made brisk plans to demolish it. But in stepped the Eden Project, a nature preserve on the Cornish coast of the United Kingdom, offering the tree a kind of retirement home, as Eden does for many other plants. Here, people like Ryan make sure all its needs are attended to. Ryan has deep knowledge of the plants in his care and a consequent respect for them. “The timescales of these plants puts any notion of intelligence into some pretty sharp focus,” he said. “Is that olive tree cleverer than us?” Given its lifespan, I was willing to think: Maybe? Nonhuman intelligence has been the subject of a long-running and contentious war in science whose sides have periodically skirmished over the past 150 years. It was Charles Darwin who first popularized in the West the abilities in plants that in any human we would be comfortable describing as a display of intelligence. But we don’t. Intelligence is still, for the most part, tightly defined as a human quality. The strict rules have relaxed somewhat in the past few decades, thanks to animal behavior scientists from primatologists to insectologists agitating to admit the objects of their study into the smart club. Crows can use tools, dolphins and bees use language, whales appear to communicate across hundreds of miles, octopuses are extraordinary escape artists — the list is getting longer every year. “It would seem from recent research that the term ‘intelligence’ has too many shades and variations and synonyms, an undifferentiated sludge with little scientific utility.” Plants, however, are still excluded by most scientists. The idea that they could be intelligent threatens to stretch the definition of some concepts that are fundamental to humans’ perception of themselves and the cosmos — cognition, understanding, reasoning, sentience — into meaninglessness. Plants, after all, don’t speak or move or react in ways most people would recognize as the actions of thinking beings with independent agency. And yet … We seem to be entering a new era of cries du coeur to gather more life, including plants, under the umbrella of intelligence. Bookstores these days are heaving with volumes with titles like “The Revolutionary Genius of Plants,” “Planta Sapiens” and “The Light Eaters.” Their authors are not even at the vanguard anymore. Some boldly go even further, finding behavior they label intelligent in fungi, bacteria, slime molds and paramecia. Even the cells that constitute our bodies are now standing at the velvet ropes, backed by frontier scientists waving evidence of behavior that might qualify as the hallmarks of intelligence if it were observed in an animal. What on Earth is going on? Should we consider everything to be intelligent now? There’s some evidence that the question is exactly backward. A small but growing number of philosophers, physicists and developmental biologists say that, instead of continually admitting new creatures into the category of intelligence, the new findings are evidence that there is something catastrophically wrong with the way we understand intelligence itself. And they believe that if we can bring ourselves to dramatically reconsider what we think we know about it, we will end up with a much better concept of how to restabilize the balance between human and nonhuman life amid an ecological omnicrisis that threatens to permanently alter the trajectory of every living thing on Earth. The olive tree at the Eden Project. A Potted History Of Intelligent Plants It took a long time for anyone to notice what plants were getting up to. For millennia, Western intellectuals had dismissed plants as inert scenery at the bottom of what Aristotle called “scala naturae,” the “ladder of life” or “great chain of being.” But after observing the animal-like hunting movements of Venus flytraps and other carnivorous plants, Darwin began to doubt the dogma. He speculated that perhaps plants might be thought of as upside-down humans whose “brains” in their roots controlled the motion and activity of the limbs up above. Quite unlike the plaudits and societal disruption that had attended “On the Origin of Species,” however, the book in which he asserted this new idea was met mostly with embarrassed silence. Sporadic reawakenings of scientific interest in the question were torpedoed in the 1970s, when the former CIA agent Cleve Backster published findings that he had hooked a house plant up to a lie detector, thought pointedly about setting it on fire, and then took the squiggles on the machine to mean it had telepathically read his mind. This nonsense muffled many intriguing findings over the following 30 years. By the turn of the 21st century, however, a renegade group of plant physiologists had had enough. They argued that it was past time to bring existing theories of plant behavior into line with the avalanche of new observations enabled by late 20th-century advances in molecular biology, genomics, ecology and neurophysiology. Perhaps they weren’t reading anyone’s mind, but it sure started to look like plants had (some version of) their own. Among many findings that precipitated the revolt and have proliferated since: Plants can sense — and with a bigger sensory suite than the one humans have. More importantly, they can integrate the information those senses carry and use it to make decisions. For example, the molecular biologist Edward Farmer and his colleagues at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland found in a 2000 study that Arabidopsis (the main model organism in plant physiology studies) markedly alters its hormone response depending on the size of a caterpillar munching on its leaves. When the attacker is small, the strategy is to keep them that way. “It’s better to be eaten by something small than by something big,” Farmer told me. And so, when attacked, “the leaf makes itself harder to eat” by producing toxic chemicals and proteins that interfere with digestion. This strategy slows the caterpillar’s growth and can delay pupation. One interpretation of this, according to Farmer, is that the plant can make a decision about how much energy to expend to repel pests based on the severity of the threat to its vital anatomy. Other plants have similar responses. Phaseolus lunatus (lima bean) mounts a particularly Machiavellian response: When a caterpillar starts snacking on it, it emits a chemical tailored to entice parasitic wasps, which swoop in like cavalry to pick off the predators. Ten years ago, researchers discovered that Boquila trifoliolata, a vine native to southern Chile, is somehow able to pass itself off as whichever species of plant is nearby, imitating its characteristic shape, color and pattern, possibly to entice pollinators or put off herbivores by assuming the guise of a less tasty snack. In one experiment , it even seemed to imitate a plastic houseplant. Researchers also found that some plants show evidence of memory. A Venus flytrap counts the number of times an insect has triggered its sensory hairs — two in a row, not one, are usually required for it to clamp down on an interloper. To avoid a false alarm, it then seems to count to three (the trapped insect’s struggle?) before deploying costly digestive juices. Plants that track the sun seem to be able to retain their knowledge of when it will rise, even after a few days in the dark. Others appear to learn lessons from droughts, shrinking or completely closing the evaporation pores on their leaves, perhaps to prepare them to cope with continued dry conditions. “In every way, a ‘human’ seems to be a collaboration between many organisms that have cooperated to form a superintelligence.” It’s not just plants. Fungi, the objects of numerous investigations over the past several decades, exhibit goal-directed behavior — even, in the case of some parasitic species, manipulating the goals of their hosts. Like plants, they seem to sense: Their microscopic thread-like tendrils (hyphae) feel their way around the world, and they use sensory input to inform their next moves, such as whether to grow toward, around or away from whatever stimulus they touch. Writing in the magazine Psyche , the fungal biologist Nicholas Money saw in these behaviors the hallmarks of “spatial recognition, memory and intelligence.” In 2022, another researcher, Andrew Adamatzky, found evidence that enoki, split gill, ghost and caterpillar fungi may incorporate environmental information into stable internal concepts , like a human in a forest processing their surroundings into the words tree, rock and squirrel. The fungi may even recognize
