---
id: 147
url: https://publicdomainreview.org/essay/science-of-sound/
title: "Hooked on Sonics: Experimenting with Sound in 19th-Century Popular Science\n\
  \ — The Public Domain Review"
domain: publicdomainreview.org
source_date: '2025-11-14'
tags:
- physics
- academic-paper
- nonfiction-book
summary: In the 19th century, popular science books democratized acoustic experimentation
  by presenting sound studies as entertaining, accessible activities for middle-class
  families and children. Building on Ernst Chladni's revolutionary 1777 experiment
  (which made sound visible through vibrating sand patterns), these primers encouraged
  home-based scientific discovery by blending rigorous learning with beauty and pleasure
  rather than detachment. This period of heightened "acoustic awareness" reflected
  broader Victorian fascination with sound and listening, establishing a progressive
  educational model that positioned science as playful intellectual discovery available
  to everyone.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Hooked on Sonics: Experimenting with Sound in 19th-Century Popular Science
 — The Public Domain Review

Scroll through the whole page to download all images before printing. An experiment demonstrating the reflection of sonic vibrations, from Alfred Marshall Mayer’s Sound: A Series of Simple, Entertaining, and Inexpensive Experiments in the Phenomena of Sound (1879) — Source . In 1777, the German physicist Ernst Chladni, who would later be crowned the Father of Acoustics, designed an experiment that revolutionized our understanding of sound. After placing grains of sand on a thin metal plate and drawing a violin bow along one edge, Chladni watched in wonder as the sand danced and jiggled into surprising shapes — all perfectly even and symmetrical, but changing their formations depending on how the bow was used. In their beauty and complexity, these shapes (which the physicist himself cannily called “Chladni figures”) seemed to be arranged by invisible hands. In one simple and elegant experiment, sound had become visible. 1 Here at last was clear proof that sound was not produced by generating tiny particles of matter within air, as the dominant theorists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries had insisted, but was instead the result of vibrations from waves. While earlier claims about the wave-like properties of sound (which in fact date back to Aristotle’s Physics ) had fallen mostly on deaf ears, Chladni’s experiment provided undeniable evidence that sound was caused by waves that could move through both air and matter. Chladni’s ingenious demonstration also showed that sound could be observed in a variety of new ways, and would no longer be consigned to the invisible aether. Moreover, it was an easy experiment to replicate for anyone who could get their hands on a copper plate, a violin bow, and some sand. In fact, it was so widely reproduced that, in 1901, Annie Besant and Charles Leadbetter, in their wonderful (and completely bizarre) theosophical study Thought-Forms , could write that Chladni figures were “already familiar to every student of acoustics”, being “continually reproduced in every physical laboratory”. 2 Scroll through the whole page to download all images before printing. Diagram of Chladni’s figures from Entdeckungen über die Theorie des Klanges (Discoveries in the theory of sound, 1787) — Source . Scroll through the whole page to download all images before printing. Illustration of Chladni’s technique for producing his figures, from John Tyndall’s Sound (1869) — Source . The students of acoustics Besant and Leadbetter had in mind were educated through a vast collection of primers, textbooks, and popular introductions to science that were widely read across the nineteenth century. Despite being little known today, such texts were part of an important wave of science popularization, whose authors, according to the historian Bernard Lightman, “saw themselves as providing both entertainment and instruction to their readers”. 3 Written for a growing middle-class audience, such books and periodicals gave detailed descriptions of groundbreaking experiments, encouraging readers to imagine their own homes as sites of scientific discovery and playful experimentation. Genuine learning and rich enjoyment, these books proclaimed, could be had within the home, and any reader with patience, curiosity, and some basic equipment could follow along with the latest scientific revelations. In fact, even children could do so, and the experiments in these books were democratically pitched to the whole family. Although they ranged over many scientific disciplines — including chemistry, optics, physics, magnetism, and astronomy — it is their presentation of the emerging subfield of acoustics that is particularly intriguing, since it reveals many facets of nineteenth-century culture. These books speak to a widespread amateur fascination with science and reveal a desire to initiate even the very young into a world of intellectual discovery and delight. In doing so, they set forth a new model of learning — based on play, beauty, and pleasure — that anticipates many later approaches to education. These popularizing books also offer a vision of science that has now largely been forgotten. While, in our own time, scientific understanding is usually thought of in terms of detachment and objectivity, here beauty and knowledge were often intertwined. Finally, and perhaps most unexpectedly, these books prompted readers to reflect on questions of spirituality and transcendence, since they positioned the science of acoustics as a fresh avenue for moving beyond the material plane. Scroll through the whole page to download all images before printing. A figure copied from Ernst Heinrich Weber and Wilhelm Eduard Weber’s Wellenlehre auf Experimente gegründet (Wave theory based on experiments, 1825) demonstrating “the chasing produced by water-waves in a circular vessel”, from John Tyndall’s Sound (1869) — Source . The Century of Sound These sonic experiments reflected new listening practices and new theories of sound that unfolded across the nineteenth century. It is a century that has been described by the literary critic John Picker as the “auscultative age”, extending the term that René Laennec coined for the invention of his stethoscope to describe the Victorians’ “careful listening to a world at large — and in flux”. 4 The century also saw the birth of technologies designed to amplify, transmit, and record sound — the self-performing player piano, the phonograph, telephone, and radio, for instance. Of all the senses that the Victorians cultivated, it was the sense of hearing that experienced the most dramatic transformation. The Victorians, according to Jonathan Sterne, underwent what he terms “ensoniment”: an acoustic Enlightenment. 5 Part of this transformation included a new understanding of children’s sensitivity to sound. In his 1878 essay “Child’s Play”, Robert Louis Stevenson argued that children’s hearing is far more acute and developed than their other senses. He suggests that while children “have no great faculty for looking” (since “they do not use their eyes for the pleasure of using them, but for by-ends of their own”) and have a “sense of touch” that is not “so clean and poignant . . . as it is in a man”, both their hearing and their sense of smell are superior and “more developed” to that of their elders. But Stevenson was also convinced that the child’s naturally superior hearing could be further cultivated. For all the freshness of sound to a child, he wrote, “hearing is capable of vast improvement as a means of pleasure; and there is all the world between gaping wonderment at the jargon of birds, and the emotion with which a man listens to articulate music.” 6 The writers of these popular books of science for children may well have shared Stevenson’s conviction: they, too, wanted to educate the ears and minds of young readers, allowing them to experience and understand sound with greater precision and sensitivity. Scroll through the whole page to download all images before printing. Coloured engraving of acoustical illustrations by John Emslie, from James Reynolds’ Illustrations of Natural Philosophy (1850) — Source . Middle-class families of this era often read aloud to one another from novels, poetry collections, newspapers, and periodicals — that is, even printed texts were very often experienced sonically, suggesting yet another everyday aspect of Victorian listening. But the long evenings of the pre-electric nineteenth century also allowed ample time for other pursuits, including amateur science. The authors of these books stressed that their experiments could be carried out by the entire family, and even the smallest children need not miss out on the fun. Playful Discovery And there was indeed fun to be had. Clearly, part of the appeal of these experiments was in their sheer entertainment value. These books often use the language of “scientific amusements”, “scientific recreations”, and even scientific “parlour magic” to stress how diverting and delightful science could be. A young child might easily create intricate “acoustic curves” with the help of a basic pendulum, or construct a small siren that allowed for instructive observations on differences in pitch. The books contained advice for finding and listening to various kinds of harmonics, vibrating cords, and for observing sounds being reflected by small flames. Even a very simple experiment, such as swinging a whistle around on a string at various speeds, could yield valuable knowledge about vibration and frequency. Scroll through the whole page to download all images before printing. Cover of Arabella Burton Buckley’s The Fairy-Land of Science (1883), a collection of ten scientific lectures delivered to children in 1878 — Source . Scroll through the whole page to download all images before printing. Cover and spine of John Henry Pepper’s The Boy’s Playbook of Science (ca. 1880 edition), featuring aeronauts and will-o'-the-wisp — Source . Arabella Buckley’s whimsical Fairy-Land of Science (1879), for instance, encourages children to experiment with all manner of scientific principles, and her chapter “The Voices of Nature and How We Hear Them” included details of many intriguing sonic demonstrations. At one point, she instructs her readers to “take a poker and tie a piece of string to it, and holding the ends of the string to your ears, strike the poker against the fender.” 7 After noting the way the sound travelled through the string, she then invites children to hold the string in their teeth and block their ears, demonstrating the power of bone to conduct sound waves in a simple — but surely unforgettable — experiment. Elsewhere, she explains how birds produce such complexly beautiful trills and calls, and explores other miracles of the natural world. Like many popular science writers of the era, she encourages her young readers to poke around in their own ear to investigate its features: “Put your finger round your ear and feel how the gr
