---
id: 178
url: https://www.asimov.press/p/electron-microscope
title: Making the Electron Microscope
domain: www.asimov.press
source_date: '2025-10-27'
tags:
- physics
- biology
- nonfiction-book
summary: The electron microscope evolved from a barely functional tool in the 1930s
  into a powerful instrument capable of revealing atomic-level detail, fundamentally
  transforming our understanding of biological structures. Invented by Ernst Ruska
  and Max Knoll in 1931, the technology overcame the resolution limits of light microscopes
  by using electromagnetic coils to focus electron beams instead of light, enabling
  scientists to visualize viruses, proteins, and cellular mechanisms invisible to
  earlier instruments. Today, modern cryo-electron microscopy techniques have proven
  invaluable for medical breakthroughs, including revealing the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
  during the COVID-19 pandemic and discovering heat-sensing proteins that won a Nobel
  Prize.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Making the Electron Microscope

The Long Read Making the Electron Microscope In a little over a century, the electron microscope evolved from a tool barely capable of resolving virus particles into one able to capture atomic detail. Smrithi Sunil and Asimov Press Oct 26, 2025 59 4 6 Share Article voiceover 0:00 -45:09 Audio playback is not supported on your browser. Please upgrade. Biological structures exist across a vast range of scales. At one end are whole organisms, varying in size from bacteria only a few micrometers across to mammals measured in feet. 1 These can be seen with the naked eye or with simple light microscopes, which have been in use since the mid-1600s. At the smaller end, however, are atoms, amino acids, and proteins, spanning angstroms 2 to nanometers in size. Observing molecules at this smaller scale allows us to untangle the finer mechanisms of life: how individual neurons connect and communicate, how the ribosomal machinery translates genetic code into proteins, or how viruses like HIV invade and hijack host cells. Resolving fine structures, whether the double membrane of a chloroplast, the protein shell of a bacteriophage, or the branching architecture of a synapse, provides the bridge between atomic detail and whole-organism physiology, taking us from form to function. Neurons communicate via the release of excitatory (left) and inhibitory (right) neurotransmitters at the junction, or synapse, between two cells. This gap is roughly 20 nanometers wide. Credit: David Goodsell The ability to explore and map such minute mechanisms eluded scientists until the invention of the electron microscope. Conceived in the 1930s, it promised theoretical resolutions on the order of angstroms, nearly a hundred times finer than the most advanced light microscope of that era. In 1931, Ernst Ruska and his advisor Max Knoll, working at the Technical University in Berlin, designed the first prototype by replacing glass lenses with electromagnetic coils to focus beams of electrons instead of light. That first instrument barely outperformed a magnifying glass in terms of resolution. But over the next century, refinements in design, sample preparation, and computation transformed the electron microscope into an indispensable tool for modern biology. By 1938, scientists used an electron microscope to take a photograph of a virus — the mouse ectromelia orthopoxvirus — for the first time. 3 And today, modern cryo-electron microscopy, in which samples are frozen in liquid ethane prior to imaging, can resolve individual atoms within proteins. During the COVID-19 pandemic, cryo-electron microscopy revealed the spike protein in the SARS-CoV-2 virus, which directly influenced the development of COVID vaccines. The technique also revealed a protein receptor that senses heat and pain, demonstrating how it translates physical signals to our nervous system, a breakthrough discovery that earned the 2021 Nobel Prize in Physiology. The 1938 article, penned in German, where Ruska and von Borries first shared their electron micrographs of Bacterium coli , Bacilli , and viruses. Electron micrographs of the mouse ectromelia virus taken in 1938 by Ernst Ruska, Helmut Ruska, and Bodo von Borries. Source Even as electron microscopes have allowed us to view ever smaller structures with clarity, challenges remain. One is that the images remain limited to static snapshots. Because samples must be imaged in a vacuum, it is impossible to directly observe the dynamism of live cells. 4 In addition, specimens must be extremely thin to allow the electron beam to pass through, which prevents imaging of thick tissues. And finally, beyond these biological constraints, electron microscopes are physically large, can cost millions of dollars, and demand specialized facilities, training, and expertise to operate. Despite these limitations, electron microscopy remains a powerful tool in biology, bridging the scales between molecular structure and living function. The story of its discovery is one of persistent ingenuity, involving a large cast of characters and numerous breakthroughs that helped make the modern electron microscope possible. Deep writing about biology. Always free. Subscribe! The Seeds of an Idea By the late 19th century, biologists knew they were approaching the resolution limit of the light microscope. In their quest to see biology in finer detail, they had reached a barrier that light could not cross. Proof of this came from Ernst Abbe, a professor of experimental physics and mathematics at the University of Jena in Germany. Until Abbe, microscope design had been more of an art than a science , with innovators building optical instruments through trial and error. Carl Zeiss, who had begun manufacturing microscopes in the 1850s, approached Abbe in 1866 about using his scientific expertise for the construction of microscopes. Together, they began developing tools to improve the uniformity and quality of optical lenses. Ernst Abbe In the early 1870s , while working on the microscope objectives (the lens closest to the specimen in a microscope), Abbe discovered that the sharpness of an image did not only depend on how perfectly a lens was ground but also on how much diffracted light from the specimen the lens could capture. He realized that fine details in a specimen bend light into wide angles, and only objectives with a sufficiently large opening could collect those rays to bring the image into focus. From this insight, Abbe defined the concept of the “numerical aperture” (a measure of how much light a lens can gather 5 ) and showed that the smallest visible detail is limited by the wavelength of light divided by twice this value. 6 Even with ultraviolet light, at the short end of the visible spectrum (400 nanometers), the limit of resolution was 200 nanometers — larger than most viruses, intracellular structures, and protein complexes. Hope of resolving structures beneath this resolution boundary only arrived in 1895, when the German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen discovered X-rays , a form of high-energy electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths shorter than those of ultraviolet light, and published a (now-iconic) image of his wife Bertha’s hand, with her bones and wedding ring clearly visible. This was the first time the hidden insides of the body could be seen without dissection. The bones, joints, and even metal fragments lodged inside the body could be made visible. A 19th-century light microscope with an objective revolver and Abbe condenser. Engraving by Carl Reichert. Between 1913 and 1915, the British physicist William Henry Bragg and his son, William Lawrence Bragg, developed a technique called X-ray crystallography . Working with simple crystals such as salt and diamond, they showed that when X-rays strike a regularly ordered crystal lattice, they diffract at specific angles that reveal the spacing of atoms within the crystal. The method works because X-rays have wavelengths about the size of chemical bonds, allowing the beams to reach and bounce off each atom in the lattice, reflecting the structure at an atomic scale. By applying a mathematical operation called a Fourier transform to these diffraction patterns captured on photographic plates, the Braggs reconstructed the three-dimensional arrangements of the atoms in the crystal. Biomolecules, however, are not naturally crystalline. To study them, they had to be laboriously extracted, purified, and crystallized, separating them from their environment. The X-ray crystallography of biomolecules began in the 1930s , ushering in the field of structural biology. With sub-nanometer resolution, the invention of X-ray crystallography enabled a revolution in molecular biology. It was applied, for example, to solve the structures of DNA , hemoglobin , and insulin , molecules that have shaped the trajectory of modern biology. But many biological targets remained out of reach. Viruses could rarely be crystallized, and cellular structures often lost their integrity when removed from their natural contexts. Thus, even with X-ray crystallography revealing the structures of small proteins and light microscopy capable of imaging cells, a gulf persisted between the study of small molecules and whole cells, which left much of biology invisible. Photo 51, the X-ray diffraction pattern of DNA taken by Raymond Gosling with Rosalind Franklin. Meanwhile, access to the parallel world of electrons was beginning to open. At the turn of the 20th century, Hans Busch, a German physicist at the University of Jena, was studying how electron beams behaved in magnetic fields. His work built on decades of experiments with cathode rays , streams of electrons released when a high voltage is applied inside a glass tube. Cathode rays had become central to both physics and technology: Physicists used them to probe how electrons scattered, ionized gases, and responded to electric and magnetic fields, and engineers used them to form the basis of devices such as the radio and television. It was while trying to better understand and control these beams that Busch postulated his remarkable theories. In 1926 and 1927 , Busch published two papers demonstrating mathematically that a magnetic coil could focus an electron beam in the same manner that a glass lens focuses light. While it was already known that coils could bend electron beams, 7 Busch’s key insight was to frame this behavior in the language of optics: Electron beams could be treated like light rays. Concepts such as focal length , magnification, image formation, and even lens aberrations could all be applied to electrons. This meant that the well-developed theory of optical systems could be imported almost directly to other disciplines. Schematic of a cathode ray tube, ca. 1930s. The Nobel Prize–winning physicist and inventor of holography , Denis Gabor, later reflected on Busch’s contribution in a 1942 lecture: “Busch’s paper was more than an eye-opener; it was almost like a spark in
