---
id: 377
url: https://bzolang.blog/p/the-unsustainability-of-moores-law
title: The Unsustainability of Moore’s Law - by Charles Rosenbauer
domain: bzolang.blog
source_date: '2025-06-29'
tags:
- physics
- academic-paper
summary: 'Moore''s Law—the observation that transistor density on chips doubles roughly
  every two years—is becoming unsustainable due to escalating manufacturing costs
  and physical limitations. While the cost to build semiconductor fabrication plants
  has skyrocketed from $2-4 billion 25 years ago to over $100 billion today, the industry
  is simultaneously hitting hard physical barriers: conventional photoresist materials
  stop working below 5-10 nanometers, transistor geometry has become exponentially
  more complex to manufacture, and current optical techniques are approaching their
  theoretical limits. Without clear solutions to these compounding challenges, the
  industry faces an impending wall where further miniaturization may become economically
  and physically impossible.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Unsustainability of Moore’s Law - by Charles Rosenbauer

The Unsustainability of Moore’s Law Charles Rosenbauer Apr 22, 2025 17 1 1 Share Roughly every two years, the density of transistors that can be fit onto a silicon chip doubles. This is Moore’s Law. Roughly every five years, the cost to build a factory for making such chips doubles, and the number of companies that can do it halves. 25 years ago, there were about 40 such companies and the cost to build a fab was about $2-4 billion. Today, there are either two or three such companies left (depending on your optimism toward Intel) and the cost to build a fab is in excess of $100 billion. Project these trends forward another ten years and you can expect a single factory to cost nearly half a trillion dollars, and the number of companies that can do it should drop to less than one . The plot from Gordon Moore’s original paper Nanometer Numbers The cutting edge of transistors are “2 nanometer”. Intel has abandoned nanometers as a metric and have begun using terms like 20A, 18A, and 14A, measuring in angstroms (1/10 of a nanometer, or the approximate width of a typical atom). However, these nanometer numbers are entirely fake today. This used to be an objective measure of the width of the gate on a planar transistor, but planar transistors stopped working 15 years ago. Their current substitute, FinFET transistors, have no equivalent feature to measure. The physical feature these numbers once measured no longer exists, but some naming scheme is still needed. The advertised transistor density of modern 2nm nodes is somewhere around 200-250 million transistors per square mm. There are one trillion square nanometers in a square millimeter, and dividing this out this gives us a footprint of 4000-5000 square nanometers per transistor, or roughly a square 60nm on each side. The gate pitch, or minimum distance between transistors, is generally in the range of 30-40nm, and the 60x60nm footprint is a result of geometric constraints on how densely irregular circuits can be packed, leaving unavoidable empty space. The extremely tiny features on a chip are produced via photolithography – a light is flashed through a photomask to project an image onto a wafer coated in a light-sensitive photoresist, which hardens or liquifies depending on its exposure to light. The tinier the image can be made while retaining focus and detail, the smaller components can be made. The hype over the past few years around EUV (Extreme UltraViolet) lithography is mostly in its extremely fine resolution. Previous generations of lithography equipment relied on wavelengths of ultraviolet light measured in hundreds of nanometers, which puts limits on just how small of patterns can be created on a chip. This was cheated somewhat using multipatterning – if your “pixels” are 200nm across, you can shift the image by 100nm and project a new image, giving you some extra resolution in how the two images overlap. You can even do this multiple times, and employ a number of other tricks to cheat out much finer details than should be theoretically possible, at the expense of much more complicated and defect-prone manufacturing. EUV uses light with a wavelength of only 13.5nm, which lands in the overlap between “extreme UV” and “soft X-rays”. Being technically a form of X-ray (prone to passing through things), optical manipulation of this light is difficult – magnification requires atomically-precise curved mirrors relying on the Bragg effect to diffract the X-rays backward, as traditional materials are very ineffective at conventionally reflecting X-rays. X-ray lenses are effectively off the table. EUV gives us “pixels” of about 13.5nm to build our chip from. ASML is now rolling out its “High-NA EUV” machines, which exploit some optical tricks to get this resolution down to about 6 or 7nm. These “pixels” are still dozens of atoms across. We could theoretically scale down further – a 6x6x6nm cube has about a quarter million atoms. I suspect that if someone were simply willing to bite the bullet and attempt a 1:1 scale between wafers and photomasks, all this complicated optics could be eliminated and soft X-rays with 1-2nm wavelengths or less could be used. A typical medical X-ray tube is orders of magnitude more energy efficient at turning electricity into photons than the method of lasering molten tin droplets that’s currently used to produce EUV light. An X-ray tube is a simple vacuum tube with an electron beam between a cathode and anode, and the specific wavelength produced is a function of the atomic number of whatever material that the anode is made from. The next problem however is not the wavelength of the photons, but rather the chemistry of the photoresist. Conventional photoresists are based on polymers – long chains of molecules that link or unlink when struck with photons. Linking them together forms a spaghetti-like knot on top of the silicon. However, the links of these chains are not infinitely small – they are made from atoms just like everything else, and they only work when forming long enough chains. Conventional photoresists stop working below 7-10nm, and most unconventional resists stop working below 5. I’m not aware of any clear plan for scaling past this fast-approaching point. Transistor Geometry In a transistor, the voltage of the gate lying on top of the channel controls the conductivity of the channel beneath it, either creating an insulator or “depletion region”, or leaving the silicon naturally conductive. Of course, the effect is localized, and the further away from the gate the effect weaker it is. About 15 years ago, the gates got small enough that the insulating region no longer could reach very deep into the silicon. This shallow depletion region is hardly a barrier to electrons at all – the electrons began to merely travel underneath. Planar transistors, which had served as the workhorse of Moore’s Law for nearly 50 years, had to be abandoned in favor of FinFET transistors – rather than the gate lying flat across the channel, the channel is now a thin, vertical fin, and the gate wraps around three of the four sides. This increases the surface area between the gate and the channel, and means that this shallow depletion region needs only to reach toward the center of this thin fin to block off the flow of electrons. FinFETs created a dramatic increase in manufacturing complexity, and forced several big players like Global Foundries to abandon chasing Moore’s Law. They have been the new workhorse, but will not be nearly as long-lived as planar transistors. Instead, after a mere 15 years they have already reached their limits and are being phased out in favor of GAAFETs – Gate-All-Around Field Effect Transistors. Intel calls them RibbonFETs. Rather than a vertical fin with a gate wire on three sides, GAAFET has the gate wrap around all four sides of the channel, and then stacks several channels on top of each other for extra reliability. GAAFET is a dramatic increase in complexity on top of FinFETs – the layering is particularly hard, especially as there must be a thin insulating layer between the channel and the gate, and this layer must now wrap around all sides of a stack of channels. This alone multiplies the number of manufacturing steps, and thus multiplies the number of opportunities for defects, which eat into the bottom line of running a chip fab. Even GAAFET is only expected to last a couple generations before it too runs out of steam. The end of the road seems like it may be CFET. Transistors naturally come in two flavors – PMOS and NMOS, and the CMOS logic that serves as the foundation of nearly all digital logic involves using the two together. CFET is simply GAAFET, but stacking the NMOS transistors on top of the PMOS transistors without much attempt to scale them. Other Limitations AMD launched the first 1 GHz processor in 2000, and Intel was soon boasting that they’d have 10 GHz processors by 2010. It is now 2025, and the CPU in my laptop maxes out with a mere 4 GHz boost speed. Where’s my other 6 GHz? Where’s all the further gains Intel was supposed to deliver in the past 15 years? What had enabled this clock speed growth for decades was Dennard scaling, the observation that as transistors are scaled down the power density of the silicon (watts / sq mm) should stay the same. However, leakage currents and other factors do not scale with size. At large scales these are negligible, but on small scales they are not. Dennard scaling died around 2006, and clock speeds have largely stagnated ever since. The rising power density of the silicon has several other effects – rising power consumption, more extreme cooling systems, and an increasing need to disable large portions of the chip at a time to reduce power consumption. Currently, one of the big technologies that Intel is betting hard on is backside power delivery. There are two types of wiring on a chip – power and logic. The logic wiring tends to consist of many small, thin wires that switch quickly and have low capacitance. The power wiring consists of a smaller number of large, thick wires with a consistent voltage and high capacitance meant to absorb the combined voltage swings of all the circuits attached. For a variety of engineering reasons it is not ideal to have these two near each other, and so Intel has begun fabricating chips with the bulk of the power wiring engraved on the back, with millions of tiny wires passing through the silicon. This is a very difficult technology – a challenge that TSMC is not nearly as daring in bringing to market. If Intel can solve their presently high defect rates, corporate warfare, and stave off bankruptcy and buyouts, this technology may serve as a valuable advantage. On the other hand, this is an optimization that could have been introduced decades ago. Why now? Because it is a high-risk and relatively low-reward, one-time optimization. You cannot repeat this multiple times for greater gains. The gains, while meaningful, are
