---
id: 383
url: https://rubinobservatory.org/news/rubin-first-look/cosmic-treasure-chest
title: The Cosmic Treasure Chest | Rubin Observatory
domain: rubinobservatory.org
source_date: '2025-06-24'
tags:
- astronomy
- news
summary: The NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory has released its first images, revealing
  an unprecedented view of the universe with stunning detail and color. The inaugural
  image shows approximately 10 million galaxies in the Virgo Cluster region—just 0.05%
  of the roughly 20 billion galaxies Rubin will capture during its 10-year Legacy
  Survey of Space and Time. Over the next decade, Rubin's unique combination of wide-field
  imaging, rapid scanning, and advanced software will enable scientists to track cosmic
  changes, investigate dark matter and dark energy, monitor potentially hazardous
  asteroids, and make countless new discoveries about our universe.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Cosmic Treasure Chest | Rubin Observatory

Credit: NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Welcome to Rubin's cosmic treasure chest! Introducing the first riches from NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s cosmic treasure chest, a wealth of data that will help scientists make countless new discoveries about our Universe. This image, one of the first released by Rubin Observatory, exposes a Universe teeming with stars and galaxies — transforming seemingly empty, inky-black pockets of space into glittering tapestries for the first time. Only Rubin can quickly produce such large images with this much color and richness. Here, Rubin’s view is focused on the southern region of the Virgo Cluster , about 55 million light-years away from Earth and the nearest large collection of galaxies to our own Milky Way. The image offers a stunning variety of objects — from bright stars ranging from blue to red in color, to nearby blue spiral galaxies, to distant red galaxy groups — demonstrating the broad range of science made possible by Rubin data. During the 10-year Legacy Survey of Space and Time, scientists around the world will access Rubin’s treasure trove of data to address questions like: How did the Milky Way form? What makes up the 95% of the Universe we can’t see? What will a detailed inventory of Solar System objects reveal? What will we learn from watching hundreds of millions of changes in the night sky over 10 years? ‌ Made from over 1100 images captured by NSF-DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory, the video begins with a close-up of two galaxies then zooms out to reveal about 10 million galaxies. Those 10 million galaxies are roughly .05% of the approximately 20 billion galaxies Rubin Observatory will capture during its 10-year Legacy Survey of Space and Time. Credit: NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory What's in the image? Apart from a few foreground stars in our own Milky Way, the myriad specks of light captured here make up a rich tapestry of about 10 million galaxies— just 0.05% of the roughly 20 billion galaxies Rubin will image during its 10-year Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST). By the end of the survey, Rubin will have revealed this level of detail across the entire southern sky. The bright stars scattered throughout this image belong to our home galaxy. By tracking their positions, brightness, and for some, even their motion over time, Rubin will help map the Milky Way in extraordinary detail — revealing its structure, history, and how it has evolved over time. With observations of never-before-seen stellar streams, dwarf galaxies, and more, Rubin data will help scientists investigate the dynamic past of our cosmic neighborhood. How was the image created? In addition to showcasing the richness and variety of celestial light in the southern region of the Virgo Cluster, this deep, ~25-square-degree image provides a sample of the way Rubin will observe during the main survey. Each individual exposure taken by Rubin Observatory covers 10 square degrees, (about 45 full moons). Combining multiple exposures of the same place on the sky — taken at different times and with different color filters — reveals extremely faint details that wouldn’t be captured in a single exposure. The 1185 exposures combined to make this image were taken over a period of just 7 nights. Rubin Observatory is the only astronomical tool in existence that can assemble an image this wide and deep so quickly. If you’re viewing this image using Rubin Observatory’s Skyviewer tool, you can use the “display” setting to toggle between a view with and without asteroids, which appear as multicolored streaks. These moving asteroids in our Solar System were captured by Rubin's fast system at a different location in each exposure, and this is how they look when the exposures are combined. Rubin’s wide field and frequent imaging make it uniquely capable of detecting and tracking asteroids, comets, and distant trans-Neptunian objects — building a detailed inventory of our Solar System and helping protect Earth by alerting scientists to potentially hazardous objects. What's coming next This image offers a starting point for watching the ever-changing sky. Rubin will return to this same region many times over the coming decade, catching brief but important events like supernova explosions and the flares from stars as they are consumed by hungry black holes. Rubin’s software will automatically compare new images to templates built from previous images, identifying up to 10 million changes each night and providing insight into short-lived cosmic phenomena and objects in motion. On the largest scales, scientists will use Rubin’s observations of galaxies like those seen here to investigate two of the Universe’s biggest mysteries: dark matter and dark energy. By mapping the shapes and distributions of galaxies over time, scientists can infer the underlying structure of dark matter and observe how the expansion of the Universe is being influenced by dark energy. The image was captured by Rubin Observatory using the 3200-megapixel LSST Camera — the largest digital camera in the world. Rubin Observatory will scan the sky every night for 10 years, creating an ultra-wide, ultra-high-definition, time-lapse record of our Universe. We invite you to zoom in and explore this image in more detail, or take a tour that highlights some noteworthy features using Rubin’s Skyviewer app. ‌ This zoomed-in section of NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s view of the Virgo Cluster offers a vivid glimpse of the variety in the cosmos. Visible are two prominent spiral galaxies, three merging galaxies, galaxy groups both near and distant, stars within our own Milky Way, and much more. Credit: NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory ‌ This zoomed-in view reveals both the grand scale and the faint details of this dynamic region of the cosmos. Bright stars from our own Milky Way shine in the foreground, while a sea of distant reddish galaxies speckle the background. Credit NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory Image Details Date(s) of observations Parts of 7 nights in total in 2025: 21 April, 24 April, 27 April, 29 April, 1 May, 2 May, 3 May Number of exposures & filters TOTAL 1,185. u (261) g (281) r (388) i (255) 30s exposures for gri, 38s for u Total open shutter time: 37,638s or about 10.5h Dimensions & fraction of Rubin FOV (field of view) ~24 square degrees. About 2.4x Rubin FOV Object description Virgo Cluster, M49 region Data description First Look observations using the Feature Based Scheduler Constellation Virgo Explore the other First Look Releases A Swarm of New Asteroids Rhythms in the Stars Trifid and Lagoon Nebulae Press Release Ever-changing Universe Revealed in First Imagery From NSF–DOE Vera C. Rubin Observatory June 23, 2025 From distant stars and galaxies to asteroids whizzing through the Solar System, this next-generation facility unveils its first imagery and brings the night sky to life like never before Read more
