---
id: 992
url: https://www.mattkeeter.com/blog/2026-04-05-tailcall/
title: A tail-call interpreter in (nightly) Rust
domain: www.mattkeeter.com
source_date: '2026-04-05'
tags:
- rust
- compilers
- emulator
- tutorial
summary: Matt Keeter describes implementing a tail-call interpreter in nightly Rust
  for emulating the Uxn CPU, achieving performance that exceeds both his previous
  Rust implementation and hand-coded ARM64 assembly. The key innovation uses Rust's
  `become` keyword to ensure tail calls replace stack frames rather than accumulating
  them, allowing VM state to be stored in registers while avoiding the unsafe complexity
  of assembly implementations. This approach demonstrates how tail-call techniques
  can provide the performance benefits of threaded code interpreters while maintaining
  the safety and maintainability of Rust.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# A tail-call interpreter in (nightly) Rust

Matt Keeter // blog projects research blog about links A tail-call interpreter in (nightly) Rust Last week, I wrote a tail-call interpreter using the become keyword, which was recently added to nightly Rust (seven months ago is recent, right?). It was a surprisingly pleasant experience, and the resulting VM outperforms both my previous Rust implementation and my hand-coded ARM64 assembly. Tailcall-based techniques have been all the rage recently (see this overview ); consider this my trip report implementing a simple but non-trivial system. For those keeping track at home, this is the latest in my exploration of high-performance emulation of the Uxn CPU , which runs a bunch of applications in the Hundred Rabbits ecosystem. If you want to read the whole saga, here's the list: Project writeup for Raven , my original Rust implementation Beating the compiler , in which I write an ARM64 assembly implementation which outperforms my Rust code Guided by the beauty of our test suite , in which I revisit the code a year later and improve its testing and CI An x86-64 backend for raven-uxn , in which I port the assembly implementation from ARM64 to x86 (with the help of Claude Code) Experimenting with LLMs proved controversial , which wasn't a surprise; I'm pleased to declare that all of the tail-call code is human-written, and the new backend can be used as a substitute for the x86 assembly backend at a minor performance penalty. (This blog post is also entirely human-written, per my personal standards ) The next few sections summarize previous work, so feel free to skim them if you've done the reading and jump straight to tailcalls in Rust . Basics of Uxn emulation Uxn is a simple stack machine with 256 instructions. The whole CPU has just over 64K of space, split between a few memories: Two 256-byte stacks, each with an index byte 65536 bytes of RAM, which is used for both data and program text A 2-byte program counter 256 bytes of "device memory", used for peripherals The simplest emulator reads a byte from RAM at the program counter, then calls into an instruction (which may update the program counter): fn run(core: &mut Uxn, dev: &mut Device, mut pc: u16) -> u16 { loop { let op = core.next(&mut pc); let Some(next) = core.op(op, dev, pc) else { break pc; }; pc = next; } } impl Uxn { fn op( &mut self, op: u8, dev: &mut Device, pc: u16 ) -> Option<u16> { match op { op::BRK => self.brk(pc), op::INC => self.inc::<0b000>(pc), op::POP => self.pop::<0b000>(pc), op::NIP => self.nip::<0b000>(pc), op::SWP => self.swp::<0b000>(pc), // ... etc op::ORA2kr => self.ora::<0b111>(pc), op::EOR2kr => self.eor::<0b111>(pc), op::SFT2kr => self.sft::<0b111>(pc), } } } There are 256 instructions, many of which are parameterized with flags. Here's the INC instruction, which increments the top byte on the stack: impl Uxn { pub fn inc<const FLAGS: u8>(&mut self, pc: u16) -> Option<u16> { let mut s = self.stack_view::<FLAGS>(); let v = s.pop(); s.push(v.wrapping_add(1)); Some(pc) } } All of the opcode implementations are inlined into the main op function, but there's room for improvement : some values are stored in memory rather than registers, and the main op selection branch is unpredictable. Threaded code in assembly In our assembly implementation, we can instead use threaded code (specifically token threading ). We store all of the CPU state in registers, then end each instruction with a jump to the subsequent instruction: ; x0 | stack pointer ; x1 | stack index ; x4 | ram pointer ; x5 | program counter ; x8 | opcode table _INC: ldrb w9, [x0, x1] ; read the byte from the top of the stack add w9, w9, #1 ; increment it strb w9, [x0, x1] ; write it back ldrb w9, [x4, x5] ; load the next opcode from RAM add x5, x5, #1 ; increment the program counter and x5, x5, #0xffff ; wrap the program counter ldr x10, [x8, x9, lsl #3] ; load the opcode implementation address br x10 ; jump to the opcode's implementation This distributes the dispatch operation across every opcode, making it easier for the branch predictor to learn sequences of opcodes in the program. Overall speedups were significant: 40-50% faster on ARM64, and about 2× faster on x86-64. Unfortunately, it requires maintaining about 2000 lines of code , and is incredibly unsafe . In my x86 port, I introduced an out-of-bounds write, which stomped on a few bytes outside of device RAM; the only symptom was that the fuzzer would segfault when exiting after running a very particular program. So, what's to be done? Tail calls in Rust We'd like to get the same behavior as our assembly implementation – VM state stored in registers, dispatch at the end of each opcode – without hand-writing every instruction in assembly. Fortunately, there is hope! The core idea has almost certainly been reinvented a bunch of times, but I first encountered the idea of tail-call interpreters in the Massey Meta Machine writeup , which was a mind-expanding read. There are two pieces: Store program state in function arguments, which are mapped to registers based on your system's calling convention End each function by calling the next function We could write this today in Rust; here's our inc function: const TABLE: FunctionTable = FunctionTable([ brk, inc::<0b000>, pop::<0b000>, nip::<0b000>, swp::<0b000>, rot::<0b000>, dup::<0b000>, // ...etc ]); fn inc<'a, const FLAGS: u8>( stack_data: &'a mut [u8; 256], stack_index: u8, rstack_data: &'a mut [u8; 256], rstack_index: u8, dev: &'a mut [u8; 256], ram: &'a mut [u8; 65536], mut pc: u16, vdev: &mut dyn Device, ) -> (Uxn<'a>, u16) { let mut core = Uxn { stack: Stack { data: stack_data, index: stack_index, }, ret: Stack { data: rstack_data, index: rstack_index, }, dev, ram, }; match core.inc::<FLAGS>(pc) { Some(pc) => { let op = core.next(&mut pc); TABLE.0[op as usize]( core.stack.data, core.stack.index, core.ret.data, core.ret.index, core.dev, core.ram, pc, vdev, ) } None => (core, pc) } } We want to reuse our existing Uxn opcode implementations, so we reconstruct the core: Uxn object at the beginning of the function, call its inc function, then deconstruct it again when calling the next operation. There's a lot of boilerplate, and it's tempting to just pass a &mut Uxn argument, but that removes the "state is stored in registers" benefit; we'll remove boilerplate with a macro later on. Unfortunately, there's a problem with this implementation: thread 'snapshots::tailcall::mandelbrot' (67889685) has overflowed its stack fatal runtime error: stack overflow, aborting error: test failed, to rerun pass `-p raven-varvara --test snapshots` Even in a release build, the compiler has not optimized out the stack. As we execute more and more operations, the stack gets deeper and deeper until it inevitably overflows. We need tell the compiler to generate a br (branch to register) instead of a bl (branch-and-link) instruction, and – more importantly – not to allocate any persistent space on the stack. In other words, we need a tail call . In nightly Rust, this is a one-word fix: match core.inc::<FLAGS>(pc) { Some(pc) => { let op = core.next(&mut pc); - TABLE.0[op as usize]( + become TABLE.0[op as usize]( core.stack.data, core.stack.index, core.ret.data, core.ret.index, core.dev, core.ram, pc, vdev, ) With this change in place, the Rust compiler makes a guarantee : When tail calling a function, instead of its stack frame being added to the stack, the stack frame of the caller is directly replaced with the callee’s. That's it, everything works! End of writeup! Implementation details Okay, okay, I've got a little more to say. First, I promised a macro to eliminate the boilerplate. As always, it's a horrifying thing to behold: macro_rules! tail_fn { ($name:ident $(::<$flags:ident>)?) => { tail_fn!($name $(::<$flags>)?[][vdev: &mut dyn Device]); }; ($name:ident $(::<$flags:ident>)?($($arg:ident: $ty:ty),*)) => { tail_fn!($name $(::<$flags>)?[$($arg: $ty),*][]); }; ($name:ident $(::<$flags:ident>)?[$($arg0:ident: $ty0:ty),*][$($arg1:ident: $ty1:ty),*]) => { extern "rust-preserve-none" fn $name<'a, $(const $flags: u8)?>( stack_data: &'a mut [u8; 256], stack_index: u8, rstack_data: &'a mut [u8; 256], rstack_index: u8, dev: &'a mut [u8; 256], ram: &'a mut [u8; 65536], pc: u16, $($arg0: $ty0),* $($arg1: $ty1),* ) -> (UxnCore<'a>, u16) { let mut core = UxnCore { stack: Stack { data: stack_data, index: stack_index, }, ret: Stack { data: rstack_data, index: rstack_index, }, dev, ram, }; match core.$name::<$($flags)?>(pc, $($arg0),*) { Some(mut pc) => { let op = core.next(&mut pc); become TABLE.0[op as usize]( core.stack.data, core.stack.index, core.ret.data, core.ret.index, core.dev, core.ram, pc, $($arg0),* $($arg1),* ) } None => (core, pc), } } }; } (This is now from the actual implementation, so some types are slightly different than the simplified code earlier in this writeup) The macro is very awkward, but it lets us declare all three kinds of functions: Fabled ones Innumerable ones Those drawn with a very fine camel hair brush Wait, no, wrong list; the three kinds of functions are Bare functions Functions with FLAGS Functions with FLAGS and additional arguments Here's what all three look like: tail_fn!(brk); // bare function tail_fn!(inc::<FLAGS>); // function with flags tail_fn!(dei::<FLAGS>(dev: &mut dyn Device)); // flags and arguments You don't need to spend much time puzzling over the macro; we're firmly in "if it compiles, it works" territory here. It's also worth noting that this is still 100% safe Rust: our #![forbid(unsafe_code)] attribute remains untriggered. Codegen notes The compiler does a good job of inlining and stripping functions down to their essential operations; the boilerplate of constructing and deconstructing the UxnCore is fully optimized out. 0000000100039c50 <raven_uxn::tailcall::inc::<0>>: and x8, x0, #0xff ; mask stack pointer ldrb w9, [x21, x8] ; read byte add w9, w9, #1 ; increment value strb w9, [x21, x8] ; write back value and x8, x2, #0xffff ; mask pc ldrb w8, [x24
