---
id: 434
url: https://www.seas.upenn.edu/~cis1940/fall16/lectures/01-intro.html
title: CIS194
domain: www.seas.upenn.edu
source_date: '2025-05-26'
tags:
- haskell
- tutorial
- academic-paper
summary: 'CIS 194 is an introductory Haskell course that teaches functional programming
  fundamentals through pictures and graphics. Haskell is a lazy, pure, statically-typed
  functional language where functions are first-class values, expressions have no
  side effects, and evaluation is delayed until needed. The course emphasizes three
  core themes: understanding expressive type systems, mastering abstraction techniques,
  and adopting "wholemeal programming"—thinking about entire data structures rather
  than individual elements—which enables cleaner, more compositional code compared
  to imperative languages.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# CIS194

CIS 194 | Policies | Resources | Final Project Haskell Basics: Functions and Pictures Prelude What is Haskell? Functional Pure Lazy Statically typed Themes Types Abstraction Wholemeal programming Programming environment Basic Haskell Declarations and variables Picture Types and Functions Primitive pictures Modifying Pictures Composing Pictures Defining functions Animations Numerical Types Recursion Code Comments A word about error messages The Haskell Logo Prelude What is Haskell? Haskell is a lazy, functional programming language created in the late 1980’s by a committee of academics. There were a plethora of lazy functional languages around, everyone had their favorite, and it was hard to communicate ideas. So a bunch of people got together and designed a new language, taking some of the best ideas from existing languages (and a few new ideas of their own). Haskell was born. So what is Haskell like? Haskell is: Functional Function composition There is no precise, accepted meaning for the term “functional”. But when we say that Haskell is a functional language, we usually have in mind two things: Functions are first-class , that is, functions are values which can be used in exactly the same ways as any other sort of value. The meaning of Haskell programs is centered around evaluating expressions rather than executing instructions . Taken together, these result in an entirely different way of thinking about programming. Much of our time this semester will be spent exploring this way of thinking. Pure Not this kind of purity Haskell expressions are always referentially transparent , that is: No mutation! Everything (variables, data structures…) is immutable . Expressions never have “side effects” (like updating global variables or printing to the screen). Calling the same function with the same arguments results in the same output every time. Programs are deterministic . This may sound crazy at this point. How is it even possible to get anything done without mutation or side effects? Well, it certainly requires a shift in thinking (if you’re used to an imperative or object-oriented paradigm). But once you’ve made the shift, there are a number of wonderful benefits: Equational reasoning and refactoring : In Haskell one can always “replace equals by equals”, just like you learned in algebra class. Parallelism : Evaluating expressions in parallel is easy when they are guaranteed not to affect one another. Fewer headaches : Simply put, unrestricted effects and action-at-a-distance makes for programs that are hard to debug, maintain, and reason about. Lazy Not this kind of laziness In Haskell, expressions are not evaluated until their results are actually needed . This is a simple decision with far-reaching consequences, which we will explore throughout the semester. Some of the consequences include: It is easy to define a new control structure just by defining a function. It is possible to define and work with infinite data structures . It enables a more compositional programming style (see wholemeal programming below). One major downside, however, is that reasoning about time and space usage becomes much more complicated! Statically typed Not this kind of static Every Haskell expression has a type, and types are all checked at compile-time . Programs with type errors will not even compile, much less run. Themes Throughout this course, we will focus on three main themes. Types Static type systems can seem annoying. In fact, in languages like C++ and Java, they are annoying. But this isn’t because static type systems per se are annoying; it’s because C++ and Java’s type systems are insufficiently expressive! This semester we’ll take a close look at Haskell’s type system, which Helps clarify thinking and express program structure The first step in writing a Haskell program is usually to write down all the types . Because Haskell’s type system is so expressive, this is a non-trivial design step and is an immense help in clarifying one’s thinking about the program. Serves as a form of documentation Given an expressive type system, just looking at a function’s type tells you a lot about what the function might do and how it can be used, even before you have read a single word of written documentation. And it goes the other way: If you are using existing code, such as a library, and you are searching for a specific functionality, you often anticipate the type of the function you need, and you can find it based on that. Turns run-time errors into compile-time errors It’s much better to be able to fix errors up front than to just test a lot and hope for the best. “If it compiles, it must be correct” is mostly facetious (it’s still quite possible to have errors in logic even in a type-correct program), but you will have this experience much more likely in Haskell than in other languages. Abstraction “Don’t Repeat Yourself” is a mantra often heard in the world of programming. Also known as the “Abstraction Principle”, the idea is that nothing should be duplicated: every idea, algorithm, and piece of data should occur exactly once in your code. Taking similar pieces of code and factoring out their commonality is known as the process of abstraction . Haskell is very good at abstraction: features like parametric polymorphism, higher-order functions, and type classes all aid in the fight against repetition. Our journey through Haskell this semester will in large part be a journey from the specific to the abstract. Wholemeal programming Another theme we will explore is wholemeal programming . A quote from Ralf Hinze: “Functional languages excel at wholemeal programming, a term coined by Geraint Jones. Wholemeal programming means to think big: work with an entire list, rather than a sequence of elements; develop a solution space, rather than an individual solution; imagine a graph, rather than a single path. The wholemeal approach often offers new insights or provides new perspectives on a given problem. It is nicely complemented by the idea of projective programming: first solve a more general problem, then extract the interesting bits and pieces by transforming the general program into more specialised ones.” For example, consider this pseudocode in a C/Java-ish sort of language: int acc = 0 ; for ( int i = 0 ; i < lst.length; i++ ) { acc = acc + 3 * lst[i]; } This code suffers from what Richard Bird refers to as “indexitis”: it has to worry about the low-level details of iterating over an array by keeping track of a current index. It also mixes together what can more usefully be thought of as two separate operations: multiplying every item in a list by 3, and summing the results. In Haskell, we can just write sum (map ( 3 * ) lst) This semester we’ll explore the shift in thinking represented by this way of programming, and examine how and why Haskell makes it possible. Programming environment In this class, we start working within a programming environment called CodeWorld, which you can access at http://code.world/haskell (the /haskell is important). This has the advantages that we can start right ahead, and take care of local installation later with the integrated support for displaying graphical output, we can have nice, visual, examples and initial tasks. We will switch to compiling programs locally later during the course. If you want to work locally already now, there are instructions on the course website. Basic Haskell So let us see some Haskell code. On CodeWorld, we generally start with this code ( open on CodeWorld ): {-# LANGUAGE OverloadedStrings #-} import CodeWorld ourPicture :: Picture ourPicture = blank main :: IO () main = drawingOf ourPicture Most of these lines are not interesting initially, and will be understood fully later on. If we run this, using the green “Run” button, or alternatively pressing Ctrl-Enter , we see … nothing. Declarations and variables Not very surprising, since our picture is blank . So let us change this line to something that we can see: ourPicture = solidCircle 1 We now see a solid black circle of radius 1: What happens here? This code declares a variable with name ourPicture with type Picture (“ :: ” is pronounced “has type”), and defines its value to be circle 1 . Note that this will be the value of ourPicture forever (at least, in this particular program). The value of ourPicture cannot be changed later. If we would try to write something like ourPicture = solidCircle 1 ourPicture = solidCircle 2 then we get an error message complaining about Multiple declarations of ‘ourPicture’ . In Haskell, variables are not mutable boxes ; they are just names for values! Put another way, = does not denote “assignment” like it does in many other languages. Instead, = denotes definition , like it does in mathematics. That is, ourPicture = solidCircle 1 should not be read as “ ourPicture gets solidCircle 1 ” or “assign solidCircle 1 to ourPicture ”, but as “ ourPicture is defined to be solidCircle 1 ”. What do you think this code means? y :: Integer y = y + 1 Picture Types and Functions In contrast to a classical intro into Haskell, we do not start with numbers, booleans, tuples, lists and strings, but we start with pictures. These are of course library-defined (hence the import CodeWorld ) and not part of “the language”. But that does not make them less interesting, and in fact, even the basic boolean type is library defined – it just happens to be the standard library. Primitive pictures Every picture is a value of type, well, Picture . We have seen two such values so far: blank and solidCircle 1 . There are many more primitive pictures, for rectangles, polygons, lines, arcs and text. To get an overview, see the Help button on CodeWorld: From there you can reach the documentation of the CodeWorld API. If we look at the documentation for solidCircle , it says solidCircle :: Double -> Picture The arrow ( -> ) indicates that solidCircle itself is a function , turning a value of type Double – i.e
