---
id: 285
url: https://eli.thegreenplace.net/2025/decorator-jits-python-as-a-dsl
title: Decorator JITs - Python as a DSL - Eli Bendersky's website
domain: eli.thegreenplace.net
source_date: '2025-08-18'
tags:
- python
- compilers
- tutorial
- llm
summary: This article explores how Python decorators like `@jit` enable using Python
  as a Domain-Specific Language (DSL) in machine learning libraries such as JAX and
  Triton. Rather than executing decorated functions normally through the Python interpreter,
  these libraries parse the function's code into an intermediate representation and
  compile it (often to LLVM IR) for specialized execution, such as on GPUs. The author
  provides educational implementations of AST-based JIT decorators that demonstrate
  the translation pipeline from Python source code to compiled, optimized machine
  code, with Triton serving as a real-world case study of this pattern.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Decorator JITs - Python as a DSL - Eli Bendersky's website

Spend enough time looking at Python programs and packages for machine learning, and you'll notice that the "JIT decorator" pattern is pretty popular. For example, this JAX snippet: import jax.numpy as jnp import jax @jax . jit def add ( a , b ): return jnp . add ( a , b ) # Use "add" as a regular Python function ... = add ( ... ) Or the Triton language for writing GPU kernels directly in Python: import triton import triton.language as tl @triton . jit def add_kernel ( x_ptr , y_ptr , output_ptr , n_elements , BLOCK_SIZE : tl . constexpr ): pid = tl . program_id ( axis = 0 ) block_start = pid * BLOCK_SIZE offsets = block_start + tl . arange ( 0 , BLOCK_SIZE ) mask = offsets < n_elements x = tl . load ( x_ptr + offsets , mask = mask ) y = tl . load ( y_ptr + offsets , mask = mask ) output = x + y tl . store ( output_ptr + offsets , output , mask = mask ) In both cases, the function decorated with jit doesn't get executed by the Python interpreter in the normal sense. Instead, the code inside is more like a DSL (Domain Specific Language) processed by a special purpose compiler built into the library (JAX or Triton). Another way to think about it is that Python is used as a meta language to describe computations. In this post I will describe some implementation strategies used by libraries to make this possible. Preface - where we're going The goal is to explain how different kinds of jit decorators work by using a simplified, educational example that implements several approaches from scratch. All the approaches featured in this post will be using this flow: These are the steps that happen when a Python function wrapped with our educational jit decorator is called: The function is translated to an "expression IR" - Expr . This expression IR is converted to LLVM IR. Finally, the LLVM IR is JIT-executed. Steps (2) and (3) use llvmlite ; I've written about llvmlite before, see this post and also the pykaleidoscope project . For an introduction to JIT compilation, be sure to read this and maybe also the series of posts starting here . First, let's look at the Expr IR. Here we'll make a big simplification - only supporting functions that define a single expression, e.g.: def expr2 ( a , b , c , d ): return ( a + d ) * ( 10 - c ) + b + d / c Naturally, this can be easily generalized - after all, LLVM IR can be used to express fully general computations. Here are the Expr data structures: class Expr : pass @dataclass class ConstantExpr ( Expr ): value : float @dataclass class VarExpr ( Expr ): name : str arg_idx : int class Op ( Enum ): ADD = "+" SUB = "-" MUL = "*" DIV = "/" @dataclass class BinOpExpr ( Expr ): left : Expr right : Expr op : Op To convert an Expr into LLVM IR and JIT-execute it, we'll use this function: def llvm_jit_evaluate ( expr : Expr , * args : float ) -> float : """Use LLVM JIT to evaluate the given expression with *args. expr is an instance of Expr. *args are the arguments to the expression, each a float. The arguments must match the arguments the expression expects. Returns the result of evaluating the expression. """ llvm . initialize () llvm . initialize_native_target () llvm . initialize_native_asmprinter () llvm . initialize_native_asmparser () cg = _LLVMCodeGenerator () modref = llvm . parse_assembly ( str ( cg . codegen ( expr , len ( args )))) target = llvm . Target . from_default_triple () target_machine = target . create_target_machine () with llvm . create_mcjit_compiler ( modref , target_machine ) as ee : ee . finalize_object () cfptr = ee . get_function_address ( "func" ) cfunc = CFUNCTYPE ( c_double , * ([ c_double ] * len ( args )))( cfptr ) return cfunc ( * args ) It uses the _LLVMCodeGenerator class to actually generate LLVM IR from Expr . This process is straightforward and covered extensively in the resources I linked to earlier; take a look at the full code here . My goal with this architecture is to make things simple, but not too simple . On one hand - there are several simplifications: only single expressions are supported, very limited set of operators, etc. It's very easy to extend this! On the other hand, we could have just trivially evaluated the Expr without resorting to LLVM IR; I do want to show a more complete compilation pipeline, though, to demonstrate that an arbitrary amount of complexity can be hidden behind these simple interfaces. With these building blocks in hand, we can review the strategies used by jit decorators to convert Python functions into Expr s. AST-based JIT Python comes with powerful code reflection and introspection capabilities out of the box. Here's the astjit decorator: def astjit ( func ): @functools . wraps ( func ) def wrapper ( * args , ** kwargs ): if kwargs : raise ASTJITError ( "Keyword arguments are not supported" ) source = inspect . getsource ( func ) tree = ast . parse ( source ) emitter = _ExprCodeEmitter () emitter . visit ( tree ) return llvm_jit_evaluate ( emitter . return_expr , * args ) return wrapper This is a standard Python decorator. It takes a function and returns another function that will be used in its place ( functools.wraps ensures that function attributes like the name and docstring of the wrapper match the wrapped function). Here's how it's used: from astjit import astjit @astjit def some_expr ( a , b , c ): return b / ( a + 2 ) - c * ( b - a ) print ( some_expr ( 2 , 16 , 3 )) After astjit is applied to some_expr , what some_expr holds is the wrapper. When some_expr(2, 16, 3) is called, the wrapper is invoked with *args = [2, 16, 3] . The wrapper obtains the AST of the wrapped function, and then uses _ExprCodeEmitter to convert this AST into an Expr : class _ExprCodeEmitter ( ast . NodeVisitor ): def __init__ ( self ): self . args = [] self . return_expr = None self . op_map = { ast . Add : Op . ADD , ast . Sub : Op . SUB , ast . Mult : Op . MUL , ast . Div : Op . DIV , } def visit_FunctionDef ( self , node ): self . args = [ arg . arg for arg in node . args . args ] if len ( node . body ) != 1 or not isinstance ( node . body [ 0 ], ast . Return ): raise ASTJITError ( "Function must consist of a single return statement" ) self . visit ( node . body [ 0 ]) def visit_Return ( self , node ): self . return_expr = self . visit ( node . value ) def visit_Name ( self , node ): try : idx = self . args . index ( node . id ) except ValueError : raise ASTJITError ( f "Unknown variable { node . id } " ) return VarExpr ( node . id , idx ) def visit_Constant ( self , node ): return ConstantExpr ( node . value ) def visit_BinOp ( self , node ): left = self . visit ( node . left ) right = self . visit ( node . right ) try : op = self . op_map [ type ( node . op )] return BinOpExpr ( left , right , op ) except KeyError : raise ASTJITError ( f "Unsupported operator { node . op } " ) When _ExprCodeEmitter finishes visiting the AST it's given, its return_expr field will contain the Expr representing the function's return value. The wrapper then invokes llvm_jit_evaluate with this Expr . Note how our decorator interjects into the regular Python execution process. When some_expr is called, instead of the standard Python compilation and execution process (code is compiled into bytecode, which is then executed by the VM), we translate its code to our own representation and emit LLVM from it, and then JIT execute the LLVM IR. While it seems kinda pointless in this artificial example, in reality this means we can execute the function's code in any way we like. AST JIT case study: Triton This approach is almost exactly how the Triton language works. The body of a function decorated with @triton.jit gets parsed to a Python AST, which then - through a series of internal IRs - ends up in LLVM IR; this in turn is lowered to PTX by the NVPTX LLVM backend . Then, the code runs on a GPU using a standard CUDA pipeline. Naturally, the subset of Python that can be compiled down to a GPU is limited; but it's sufficient to run performant kernels, in a language that's much friendlier than CUDA and - more importantly - lives in the same file with the "host" part written in regular Python. For example, if you want testing and debugging, you can run Triton in "interpreter mode" which will just run the same kernels locally on a CPU. Note that Triton lets us import names from the triton.language package and use them inside kernels; these serve as the intrinsics for the language - special calls the compiler handles directly. Bytecode-based JIT Python is a fairly complicated language with a lot of features. Therefore, if our JIT has to support some large portion of Python semantics, it may make sense to leverage more of Python's own compiler. Concretely, we can have it compile the wrapped function all the way to bytecode , and start our translation from there. Here's the bytecodejit decorator that does just this [1] : def bytecodejit ( func ): @functools . wraps ( func ) def wrapper ( * args , ** kwargs ): if kwargs : raise BytecodeJITError ( "Keyword arguments are not supported" ) expr = _emit_exprcode ( func ) return llvm_jit_evaluate ( expr , * args ) return wrapper def _emit_exprcode ( func ): bc = func . __code__ stack = [] for inst in dis . get_instructions ( func ): match inst . opname : case "LOAD_FAST" : idx = inst . arg stack . append ( VarExpr ( bc . co_varnames [ idx ], idx )) case "LOAD_CONST" : stack . append ( ConstantExpr ( inst . argval )) case "BINARY_OP" : right = stack . pop () left = stack . pop () match inst . argrepr : case "+" : stack . append ( BinOpExpr ( left , right , Op . ADD )) case "-" : stack . append ( BinOpExpr ( left , right , Op . SUB )) case "*" : stack . append ( BinOpExpr ( left , right , Op . MUL )) case "/" : stack . append ( BinOpExpr ( left , right , Op . DIV )) case _ : raise BytecodeJITError ( f "Unsupported operator { inst . argval } " ) case "RETURN_VALUE" : if len ( stack ) != 1 : raise BytecodeJITError ( "Invalid stack state" ) return stack . pop () case "RESUME" | "CACHE" : # Skip nops pass case _ : raise By
