---
id: 419
url: https://obrhubr.org/logarithm-estimation
title: Estimating Logarithms - Niklas Oberhuber
domain: obrhubr.org
source_date: '2025-06-02'
tags:
- python
- tutorial
- academic-paper
summary: This article explains a historical method for estimating logarithms (base
  10) developed by John Napier around 1615, which leverages the principle that a number's
  logarithm approximates its digit count minus one. By combining this with logarithm
  properties and scientific notation, the method allows for calculating logarithms
  to arbitrary precision through iterative exponentiation—a technique that Henry Briggs
  famously used to compute logarithms to 14 decimal places. The author provides a
  Python implementation demonstrating how just 10 iterations of squaring can achieve
  4 digits of precision.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Estimating Logarithms - Niklas Oberhuber

Estimating Logarithms Published on 21st May 2025 . 5 minutes long read. This post was discussed on HN . While reading through the fantastic book The Lost Art of Logarithms by Charles Petzold I was nerd-sniped by a simple method of estimating the logarithm of any number base 10. According to the book, it was developed by John Napier (the father of the logarithm) about 1615. In french the natural logarithm is also called “le logarithm népérien ” in reference to the mathematician. The Method We note that due to the nature of the logarithm (always referring to base 10 from here one out), the logarithm of any number N N N is approximately equal to the number of digits of N N N minus one. This is quite easy to see when thinking about numbers between 100 and 1000 for example: 100 ≤ N < 1000 log ⁡ ( 100 ) ≤ log ⁡ ( N ) < log ⁡ ( 1000 ) 2 ≤ log ⁡ ( N ) < 3 \begin{align} 100 &\leq N < 1000 \\\ \log(100) &\leq \log(N) < \log(1000) \\\ 2 &\leq \log(N) < 3 \end{align} 100 lo g ( 100 ) 2 ​ ≤ N < 1000 ≤ lo g ( N ) < lo g ( 1000 ) ≤ lo g ( N ) < 3 ​ ​ This approximation by itself might seem useless at first: knowing that the logarithm of 5 is between 0 and 1 is pointless. But in combination with the following property of logarithms: log ⁡ ( a b ) = b ⋅ log ⁡ ( a ) \log(a ^ b) = b \cdot \log(a) lo g ( a b ) = b ⋅ lo g ( a ) We can calculate the logarithm of any number with arbitrary precision using the following this algorithm. We note # N \#N # N as the number of digits of N minus one. log ⁡ ( N ) ≈ # N log ⁡ ( N 10 ) ≈ # ( N 10 ) 10 ⋅ log ⁡ ( N ) ≈ # ( N 10 ) log ⁡ ( N ) ≈ # ( N 10 ) 10 \begin{align} \log(N) &\approx \# N \\\ \log(N ^{10}) &\approx \#({N^{10}}) \\\ 10 \cdot \log(N) &\approx \#({N^{10}}) \\\ \log(N) &\approx \frac{\#({N^{10}})}{10} \end{align} lo g ( N ) lo g ( N 10 ) 10 ⋅ lo g ( N ) lo g ( N ) ​ ≈ # N ≈ # ( N 10 ) ≈ # ( N 10 ) ≈ 10 # ( N 10 ) ​ ​ ​ Increase the exponent from 100 to 1000 and you’ve added another digit of precision. Henry Briggs used this method to compute the logarithms of 2 and 7 to the 14th digit. Calculating 2 1 0 14 2^{10^{14}} 2 1 0 14 must have been quite a task. He probably rounded the values a lot before multiplying, as there is no use to the first few digits at those scales. Simply exchanging the complexity of calculating the logarithm with an extremely tedious exponentiation isn’t very useful, we are lacking one more insight… One more Trick Fortunately, between the 17th century and today, mathematicians came up with something that makes this task a lot easier: scientific notation. 5 10 ≈ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 6 5^{10} \approx 9.8 \cdot 10^6 5 10 ≈ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 6 and 5 20 = 5 10 ⋅ 5 10 5^{20} = 5^{10} \cdot 5^{10} 5 20 = 5 10 ⋅ 5 10 . Thus 5 20 ≈ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 6 ⋅ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 6 ≈ 9.8 ⋅ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 12 ≈ 9.6 ⋅ 1 0 13 5^{20} \approx 9.8 \cdot 10^6 \cdot 9.8 \cdot 10^6 \approx 9.8 \cdot 9.8 \cdot 10^{12} \approx 9.6 \cdot 10^{13} 5 20 ≈ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 6 ⋅ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 6 ≈ 9.8 ⋅ 9.8 ⋅ 1 0 12 ≈ 9.6 ⋅ 1 0 13 . This was a lot easier to do than what it looked like before converting to scientific notation. And instead of starting from 0 everytime, we can use the results from our previous calculation and simpler additions and multiplications to gain more precision. Knowing that log ⁡ ( 5 ) ≈ # ( 9.6 ⋅ 1 0 13 ) 20 ≈ 13 20 ≈ 0.65 \log(5) \approx \frac{\#(9.6 \cdot 10^{13})}{20} \approx \frac{13}{20} \approx 0.65 lo g ( 5 ) ≈ 20 # ( 9.6 ⋅ 1 0 13 ) ​ ≈ 20 13 ​ ≈ 0.65 , which isn’t too far from the correct 0.69 0.69 0.69 . To increase the exponent to 5 100 5^{100} 5 100 , which will gain us even more precision, we will use the fact that 5 100 = 5 1 0 10 ≈ 9. 8 10 ⋅ 1 0 6 10 ≈ 8.2 ⋅ 1 0 69 5^{100} = 5^{10^{10}} \approx 9.8^{10} \cdot 10^{6^{10}} \approx 8.2 \cdot 10^{69} 5 100 = 5 1 0 10 ≈ 9. 8 10 ⋅ 1 0 6 10 ≈ 8.2 ⋅ 1 0 69 . By repeating these steps and keeping previous results, we only ever have to multiply the mantissa (always smaller than 10) with itself and the exponent by 2. After only 10 repetitions of exponentiating by 2 (a total of 20 rather trivial multiplications) we’ll have 4 digits of precision. In Code This is still a lot of work to do by hand and thus I went ahead and wrote a little python script that starts from N 10 N^{10} N 10 and calculates the logarithm up to arbitrary precision. import math import decimal decimal . getcontext (). prec = 100 def get_scientific ( num ): num = decimal . Decimal ( num ) # Calculate length of the number in a 'naive' way, without using the log # Using log10 here would kind of defeat the point # Because the length never exceeds 10, counting them manually is always possible length = len ( str ( math . floor ( num ))) - 1 mantissa = num / ( 10 ** length ) return mantissa , length def count_digits ( num , precision : int ): assert ( precision > 0 ) mantissa , exponent = get_scientific ( num ** 10 ) # Apply the trick here by doing the calculation iteratively for _ in range ( precision - 1 ): # Use the properties of exponents # (m x 10^exp)^10 = m^10 x 10^(10 * exp) mantissa = mantissa ** 10 exponent *= 10 mantissa , new_exponent = get_scientific ( mantissa ) # Calculate the contribution of the new mantissa to the exponent and add it exponent += new_exponent return exponent def logarithm ( num , precision ): # Count the number of digits n_digits = count_digits ( num , precision ) # Divide by the exponent result = n_digits / decimal . Decimal ( 10 ** precision ) return f " { result : . { precision } f } " For each additional digit of precision, it calculates N prev 10 N^{\text{prev}^{10}} N prev 10 , where the scientific form of N prev N^{\text{prev}} N prev is already known, starting with N 10 N^{10} N 10 . This makes the calculation a matter of exponentiating the mantissa by 10 and multiplying the exponent by 10. Rinse keep the previous results and repeat. I’m not super happy with the implementation because of the decimal import which could probably be made unnecessary by doing some string manipulations. I wrote this little post in order to remember this neat little trick better and to maybe expose some people who wouldn’t have read chapter 4 in the book to it. I can only recommend checking out the content straight from the source, online and for free !
