---
id: 564
url: https://babbagefiles.xyz/lambda-calculus-and-lisp-01/
title: Lambda Calculus and Lisp, part 1 ❚ The Neo-Babbage Files
domain: babbagefiles.xyz
source_date: '2025-02-23'
tags:
- lisp
- academic-paper
- tutorial
summary: This blog post explores the relationship between lambda calculus and Lisp,
  clarifying a common misconception that Lisp was designed as a practical implementation
  of lambda calculus. The author reveals that John McCarthy himself admitted he didn't
  fully understand lambda calculus when creating Lisp in 1958; rather, he borrowed
  lambda notation specifically to enable the description of functions needed for recursive
  list operations. The post emphasizes that while lambda is now ubiquitous in modern
  programming languages as a keyword for anonymous functions, the origin story of
  Lisp is more nuanced than popular mythology suggests.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Lambda Calculus and Lisp, part 1 ❚ The Neo-Babbage Files

Benjamin Slade The first of a series of envisioned blog posts on lambda calculus, and Lisp. It’s unclear exactly where to start: there is a whole heap of interesting issues, both theoretical and in terms of concrete implementations, which tangle and interconnect. A particular application of lambda calculus is a very salient part of my “day job” as a formal semanticist of natural language. And my interests in Emacs and lisp(s) feel like they tie in here as well—though that’s a question in itself which is probably as good of a starting point into this (planned) series of posts as any. There is much to explore: origins of John McCarthy ‘s Lisp and Alonzo Church ‘s lambda calculus; encodings of the simple made complex by restriction to a limited set of tools; recursion, fixed points, and paradoxes; infinities, philosophy, and engineering. But much of this requires stage setting. And finding an exact entry point is yet tricky. But perhaps we start with λ : the divining rod, the wizard’s crooked staff, as it is the key component of much magic of a sort. Lisp: LAMBDA the Ultimate? # We’ll start on the programming side, before turning to more philosophical or mathematical abstractions, with lambda . It is now not only Lisps which contain lambda as a keyword, many/most programming languages have lambda as a keyword, usually for the introduction of an anonymous function. That is, an unnamed function, sometimes for one-off use. But in McCarthy’s original formulation of LISP in 1958, LAMBDA was used as the basis for the implementation of functions generally: Let f be an expression that stands for a function of two integer variables. It should make sense to write f (3, 4) and the value of this expression should be determined. The expression y^2 + x does not meet this requirement; y^2 + x(3, 4) is not a conventional notation, and if we attempted to define it we would be uncertain whether its value would turn out to be 13 or 19. Church calls an expression like y2 + x , a form. A form can be converted into a function if we can determine the correspondence between the variables occurring in the form and the ordered list of arguments of the desired function. This is accomplished by Church’s λ-notation. [p.6] …. {λ[[x_1;…; x_n]; 𝓔]}∗ is (LAMBDA, (x∗_1,…, x∗_n), 𝓔∗) . [p.16] [McCarthy 1960:6, 16 1 ] As in lambda calculus, LAMBDA binds variables, and replaces any occurrences of them in the scope of the operator with whatever it receives as arguments. So the expression: ( LAMBDA ( x y z ) ( + ( * y x ) ( * z x ))) if given the arguments 5 , 2 , 3 , would replace x 's with 5 ; y 's with 2 , and z 's with 3 : ( + ( * 2 5 ) ( * 3 5 )) ;; = (+ 10 15) = 25 The illusion of a blue-suffused platonic universe of car 's # The origin of lambda keywords in LISP, and the origin of LISP’s LAMBDA in lambda calculus has suggested the idea that LISP was something like an implementation of lambda calculus as a programming language, and the certain mysticism 2 attaching to both suggests perhaps a tighter surface association than there is direct evidence for. Figure 1: xkcd 224 [see https://www.explainxkcd.com/wiki/index.php/224:_Lisp ] This is the topic of a 2019 blog post based on his talk for the Heart of Clojure conference in Daniel Szmulewicz expands on the theme “Lisp is not a realization of the Lambda Calculus”. 3 One of the points Szmulewicz draws attention to is McCarthy’s own words: …one of the myths concerning LISP that people think up or invent for themselves becomes apparent, and that is that LISP is somehow a realization of the lambda calculus, or that was the intention. The truth is that I didn’t understand the lambda calculus, really. [McCarthy 1978b:190 4 ] In the paper version of the talk, McCarthy makes a similar point, but it’s worth looking at it in the larger context: …how do you talk about the sum of the derivatives, and in programming it, there were clearly two kinds of programs that could be written. One is where you have a sum of a fixed number of terms, like just two, where you regard a sum as a binary operation. And then you could write down the formula easy enough. But the other was where you have a sum of an indefinite number of terms, and you’d really like to make that work too. To make that work, what you want to be able to talk about is doing the same operation on all the elements of a lit. You want to be able to get a new list whose elements are obtained from the old list by just taking each element and doing a certain operation to it. In order to describe that, one has to have a notation for functions. So one could write this function called mapcar . This says, “Apply the function f to all the elements of the list.” If the list is null then you’re going to get a NIL here. Otherwise you are going to apply the function to the first element of the list and put that onto a front of a list which is obtained by doing the same operation again to the rest of the list. So that’s mapcar . It wasn’t called mapcar then. It was called maplist , but maplist is something different, which I will describe in just a moment. That was fine for that recursive definition of applying a function to everything on the list. No new ideas were required. But then, how do you write these functions? And so, the way in which to do that was to borrow from Church’s Lambda Calculus, to borrow the lambda definition. Now, having borrowed this notation, one the myths concerning LISP that people think up or invent for themselves becomes apparent, and that is that LISP is somehow a realization of the lambda calculus, or that was the intention. The truth is that I didn’t understand the lambda calculus, really. In particular, I didn’t understand that you really could do conditional expressions in recursion in some sense in the pure lambda calculus. So, it wasn’t an attempt to make the lambda calculus practical, although if someone had started out with that intention, he might have ended up with something like LISP. [McCarthy 1978a:189–190 5 ] The Discovery of LISP # Two bits from the end of this I want to highlight. The first, well, it’ll come up in future posts, and probably later in this post itself, and it has to do with recursion: “I didn’t understand that you really could do conditional expressions in recursion in some sense in the pure lambda calculus” And the second is that McCarthy hedges his “LISP as a realisation of the lambda calculus is myth” stance slightly: “So, it wasn’t an attempt to make the lambda calculus practical, although if someone had started out with that intention, he might have ended up with something like LISP." This does fit rather well with (and perhaps suggested) the framing that Paul Graham does of McCarthy as the “discoverer” of Lisp — like Euclid of geometry — rather than its inventor in his “The Roots of Lisp” paper: In 1960, John McCarthy published a remarkable paper in which he did for programming something like what Euclid did for geometry . He showed how, given a handful of simple operators and a notation for functions, you can build a whole programming language. He called this language Lisp, for “List Processing,” because one of his key ideas was to use a simple data structure called a list for both code and data. It’s worth understanding what McCarthy discovered , not just as a landmark in the history of computers, but as a model for what programming is tending to become in our own time. …. In this article I’m going to try to explain in the simplest possible terms what McCarthy discovered . The point is not just to learn about an interesting theoretical result someone figured out forty years ago, but to show where languages are heading. The unusual thing about Lisp—in fact, the defining quality of Lisp—is that it can be written in itself. [Graham 2002:1 6 (emphasis mine)] Graham’s paper itself, as well as some of Graham’s other publications/postings (e.g., talking about Lisp as a sort of “secret weapon” in comparison to “blub languages”) 7 is perhaps another contributor to the mystique of Lisp. (With the flip side of “Lisp as the Cleveriest Hacker’s Secret Weapon” enchanted coin being “the Curse of Lisp” 8 .) There are other components of the history of LISP, which are suggestive of discovery rather than invention. McCarthy’s initial aim for LISP was more akin that of the Turing Machine : as a formal abstraction describing a mathematical model whose components were simple and few but yet was capable of performing any (and all) arbitrary computational operation: One mathematical consideration that influenced LISP was to express programs as applicative expressions built up from variables and constants using functions. I considered it important to make these expressions obey the usual mathematical laws allowing replacement of expressions by expressions giving the same value. The motive was to allow proofs of properties of programs using ordinary mathematical methods. This is only possible to the extent that side effects can be avoided. Unfortunately, side effects are often a great convenience when computational efficiency is important, and “functions” with side effects are present in LISP. However, the so-called pure LISP is free of side effects, and Cartwright (1976) and Cartwright and McCarthy (1978) show how to represent pure LISP programs by sentences and schemata in first-order logic and prove their properties. This is an additional vindication of the striving for mathematical neatness, because it is now easier to prove that pure LISP programs meet their specifications than it is for any other programming language in extensive use. (Fans of other programming languages are challenged to write a program to concatenate lists and prove that the operation is associative.) Another way to show that LISP was neater than Turing machines was to write a universal LISP function and show that is briefer and more comprehensible than the description of a universal Turing machine. This was the LISP function eval[e,a] , which compu
