---
id: 423
url: https://michaelnielsen.org/ddi/lisp-as-the-maxwells-equations-of-software/
title: Lisp as the Maxwell&#8217;s equations of software &#8211; DDI
domain: michaelnielsen.org
source_date: '2025-06-02'
tags:
- lisp
- tutorial
- python
- compilers
summary: This essay explores Alan Kay's famous comparison of Lisp to Maxwell's equations
  of physics, explaining how a half-page of Lisp code represents the fundamental essence
  of programming. The author teaches basic Lisp fundamentals and guides readers through
  building a functioning Lisp interpreter in Python, enabling them to understand and
  execute the elegant, foundational code from the original LISP 1.5 manual. By making
  these abstract concepts concrete and executable, the essay demonstrates why Lisp
  is considered a uniquely elegant and powerful expression of computational principles.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Lisp as the Maxwell&#8217;s equations of software &#8211; DDI

On my first day of physics graduate school, the professor in my class on electromagnetism began by stepping to the board, and wordlessly writing four equations: He stepped back, turned around, and said something like [1]: “These are Maxwell’s equations. Just four compact equations. With a little work it’s easy to understand the basic elements of the equations – what all the symbols mean, how we can compute all the relevant quantities, and so on. But while it’s easy to understand the elements of the equations, understanding all their consequences is another matter. Inside these equations is all of electromagnetism – everything from antennas to motors to circuits. If you think you understand the consequences of these four equations, then you may leave the room now, and you can come back and ace the exam at the end of semester.” Alan Kay has famously described Lisp as the “Maxwell’s equations of software”. He describes the revelation he experienced when, as a graduate student, he was studying the LISP 1.5 Programmer’s Manual and realized that “the half page of code on the bottom of page 13… was Lisp in itself. These were “Maxwell’s Equations of Software!” This is the whole world of programming in a few lines that I can put my hand over.” Here’s the half page of code that Kay saw in that manual: What we’re going to do in this essay is understand what that half page of code means, and what it means that Lisp is the Maxwell’s equations of software. However, we won’t literally work through the half page of code above. Instead, we’ll do something much more informative: we’ll create a modern, fully executable equivalent of the code above. Furthermore, to make this essay accessible, I won’t assume that you know Lisp. Instead, I’ll teach you the basic elements of Lisp. That perhaps sounds over-ambitious, but the good news is that it’s easy to learn the basic elements of Lisp. Provided you have a little facility with computer programming and comfort with mathematics, you can learn how Lisp works in just a few minutes. Frankly, it’s much easier than understanding the elements of Maxwell’s equations! And so I’ll start by explaining a subset of the Lisp programming language, and getting you to write some Lisp code. But I won’t stop with just showing you how to write some Lisp. Once we’ve done that we’re going to write an interpreter for Lisp code. In particular, we’ll create a interpreter based on a beautiful Lisp interpreter written by Peter Norvig , which contains just 90 lines of Python code. Our interpreter will be a little more complex, due mostly to the addition of a few conveniences absent from Norvig’s interpreter. The code is still simple and easy to understand, provided you’re comfortable reading Python code. As we’ll see, the benefit of writing the interpreter is not just that it gives us a running interpreter (although that’s no small thing). It’s that writing an interpreter also deepens our understanding of Lisp. It does that by taking what would otherwise be some rather abstract concepts in our description of Lisp, and giving them concrete, tangible representations in terms of Python code and data structures. By making concrete what was formerly abstract, the code for our Lisp interpreter gives us a new way of understanding how Lisp works. With our Python Lisp interpreter up and running, we’ll then write a modern equivalent to the code on the bottom of page 13 of the LISP 1.5 Programmer’s Manual. But while our code will be essentially the same as the code from page 13, it will have the considerable advantage that it’s also executable. We can, if we wish, play with the code, modify it, and improve it. In other words, it’s a living version of the Maxwell’s equations of software! Furthermore, with our new understanding it becomes an easy and fun exercise to understand all the details on page 13 of the LISP Manual. This second part of the essay is based primarily on two sources: the first chapter of the LISP 1.5 Manual, of course, but also an essay by Paul Graham (postscript) in which he explains some of the early ideas behind Lisp. Incidentally, “LISP” is the capitalization used in the LISP Manual, but otherwise I’ll use the modern capitalization convention, and write “Lisp”. The great Norwegian mathematician Niels Henrik Abel was once asked how he had become so good at mathematics. He replied that it was “by studying the masters, not their pupils” . The current essay is motivated by Abel’s admonishment. As a programmer, I’m a beginner (and almost completely new to Lisp), and so this essay is a way for me to work in detail through ideas from masters such as Alan Kay, Peter Norvig, and Paul Graham. Of course, if one takes Abel at his word, then you should stop reading this essay, and instead go study the works of Kay, Norvig, Graham, and the like! I certainly recommend taking the time to study their work, and at the end of the essay I make some recommendations for further reading. However, I hope that this essay has a distinct enough point of view to be of interest in its own right. Above all, I hope the essay makes thinking about Lisp (and programming) fun, and that it raises some interesting fundamental questions. Of course, as a beginner, the essay may contain some misunderstandings or errors (perhaps significant ones), and I’d welcome corrections, pointers, and discussion. Some elements of Lisp In this and the next two sections we’ll learn the basic elements of Lisp – enough to develop our own executable version of what Alan Kay saw on page 13 of the LISP Manual. We’ll call the dialect of Lisp we develop “tiddly Lisp”, or just tiddlylisp for short. Tiddlylisp is based on a subset of the programming language Scheme, which is one of the most popular modern dialects of Lisp. While I can show you a bunch of examples of Lisp, you’ll learn much more if you type in the examples yourself, and then play around with them, modifying them and trying your own ideas. So I want you to download the file tiddlylisp.py to your local machine. Alternately, if you’re using git , you can just clone the entire code repository associated to this essay. The file tiddlylisp.py is the Lisp interpreter whose design and code we’ll work through later in the essay. On Linux and Mac you can start the tiddlylisp interpreter by typing python tiddlylisp.py from the command line. You should see a prompt: tiddlylisp> That’s where you’re going to type in the code from the examples – it’s an interactive Lisp interpreter. You can exit the interpreter at any time by hitting Ctrl-C . Note that the interpreter isn’t terribly complete – as we’ll see, it’s only 153 lines! – and one way it’s incomplete is that the error messages aren’t very informative. Don’t spend a lot of time worrying about the errors, just try again. If you’re on Windows, and don’t already have Python installed, you’ll need to download it (I suggest Python 2.7 for this code), before starting the interpreter by running python tiddlylisp.py . Note that I’ve only tested the interpreter on Ubuntu Linux, not on Windows or the Mac. As our first example, type the following code into the tiddlylisp interpreter: tiddlylisp> (+ 2 3) 5 In the expression you typed in, + is a built-in procedure , which represents the addition operation. It’s being applied to two arguments , in this case the numbers 2 and 3 . The interpreter evaluates the result of applying + to 2 and 3 , i.e., of adding 2 and 3 together, returning the value 5 , which it then prints . That first example was extremely simple, but it contains many of the concepts we need to understand Lisp: expressions, procedures, arguments, evaluation, returning a value, and printing. We’ll see many more illustrations of these ideas below. Here’s a second example, illustrating another built-in procedure, this time the multiplication procedure, * : tiddlylisp> (* 3 4) 12 It’s the same basic story: * is a built-in procedure, this time representing multiplication, and is here being applied to the numbers 3 and 4 . The interpreter evaluates the expression, and prints the value returned, which is 12 . One potentially confusing thing about the first two examples is that I’ve called + and * “procedures”, yet in many programming languages procedures don’t return a value, only functions do. I’m using this terminology because it’s the standard terminology in the programming language Scheme, which is the dialect of Lisp that tiddlylisp is based on. In fact, in some modern dialects of Lisp – such as Common Lisp – operations such as + and * would be called “functions”. But we’ll stick with Scheme’s useage, and talk only of procedures. Another example, illustrating a slightly different type of procedure: tiddlylisp> (< 10 20) True Here, the built-in procedure < represents the comparison operator. And so tiddlylisp prints the result of evaluating an expression which compares the constants 10 and 20 . The result is True , since 10 is less than 20 . By contrast, we have tiddlylisp> (< 17 12) False since 17 is not less than 12 . Many Lisp beginners are initially confused by this way of writing basic numerical operations. We're so familiar with expressions such as 2 + 3 that the changed order in (+ 2 3) appears strange and unfamiliar. And yet our preference for the infix notation 2 + 3 over the prefix notation (+ 2 3) is more a historical accident than a consequence of anything fundamental about arithmetic. Unfortunately, this has the consequence that some people back away from Lisp, simply because they dislike thinking in this unfamiliar way. In this essay we won't get deep enough into Lisp to see in a lot of concrete detail why the prefix notation is a good idea. However, we will get one hint: our tiddlylisp interpreter will be much simpler for using the same (prefix) style for all procedures. If you really strongly dislike the prefix notation, then I challenge you to rewrite tiddlylisp so that it uses infix notation for some operations, and prefix notation for oth
