---
id: 291
url: https://lwn.net/Articles/1001773/
title: 'Nyxt: the Emacs-like web browser [LWN.net]'
domain: lwn.net
source_date: '2025-08-14'
tags:
- common-lisp
- web-dev
- github-repo
summary: Nyxt is an unconventional, keyboard-driven web browser written in Common
  Lisp that draws heavy inspiration from Emacs, designed primarily for developers
  who value customization and extensibility. Rather than a traditional graphical interface,
  Nyxt emphasizes command-line functionality and per-buffer customization (modes,
  keybindings, settings), offering users complete control over browser behavior through
  its hackable architecture. The project is transitioning from version 3.x (using
  WebKitGTK) to version 4.0, which will support multiple rendering engines including
  Electron for improved cross-platform performance and macOS/Windows compatibility.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Nyxt: the Emacs-like web browser [LWN.net]

Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering a free one-month trial subscription (no credit card required) to get you started. By Joe Brockmeier June 6, 2025 Nyxt is an unusual web browser that tries to answer the question, "what if Emacs was a good web browser?". Nyxt is not an Emacs package, but a full web browser written in Common Lisp and available under the BSD three-clause license. Its target audience is developers who want a browser that is keyboard-driven and extensible; Nyxt is also developed for Linux first, rather than Linux being an afterthought or just a sliver of its audience. The philosophy (as described in its FAQ ) behind the project is that users should be able to customize all of the browser's functionality. Background Nyxt was started in 2017 by John Mercouris, and is currently sponsored as a project by Atlas , which seems to be a two-person business focusing on Common Lisp development. The team consists of Mercouris and André A. Gomes . The post about Nyxt's origins states that it was built by Emacs users and developed to provide " a good Emacs experience while using the Internet ". It is meant to enable user freedom not only through its license, but also by focusing on the browser's " hackability " so users can fully control the browser: Nyxt and Emacs take a different approach than Unix. Instead of doing one thing and doing it well, Nyxt and Emacs share a core foundation built upon extensibility. They are designed to be introspected, changed, and hacked on the fly. With Emacs being a heavy influence on Nyxt, one might wonder why it isn't developed as an Emacs package or browser extension rather than as a standalone project. In 2021, contributor Pedro Delfino and Mercouris addressed that question in a blog post . In short, despite all of its merits, Mercouris felt that Emacs had too much technical debt to make a good basis for a web browser, and wanted to start with a clean slate. He also wanted to make Nyxt welcoming to non-Emacs users, which meant that it would be a bad idea to require people to use Emacs in order to run Nyxt. It should be noted that Nyxt has support for vi-like keybindings as well as common user access (CUA) keybindings. According to their FAQ, it was not possible to develop Nyxt as a browser extension, either: It would not be able to utilize Lisp as a powerful and modern language (a source of many of Nyxt's powerful features). Additionally, many of Nyxt's features are simply not possible due to restrictions in plugin-architecture. The current stable version of Nyxt is 3.12.0, which was released in October 2024. The 3.x series uses WebKitGTK as its rendering engine, with experimental support for Blink . The project's security policy is terse and to the point: only the latest stable version of Nyxt will receive security updates. There is no announcement list specifically for security issues, and the project requests that vulnerability reports be sent to hello@atlas.engineer . The 3.x series appears to be in maintenance mode at this point, with work focused on a 4.0 release series that was unveiled at the end of December. The 4.0 pre-releases support two renderers: WebKitGTK and Electron . According to the blog post by Gomes announcing the first preview release, 4.0 will mark " a new era for Nyxt " as a " renderer-agnostic web browser ". The project is adding Electron due to shortcomings in WebKitGTK's performance. This has required the project to improve its API " in order to achieve render agnosticism ". The move to Electron, said Gomes, will provide better performance as well as support for macOS and Windows. The latest preview release ( 4.0.0-pre-release-8 ) is only available as an AppImage with Electron as the rendering engine. Users who wish to use the WebKitGTK version will need to compile from source. Users should not expect a bunch of new features or functionality in the first stable 4.0 release; the bulk of the work seems to be refactoring for Electron support, bug fixes, and user-interface improvements. Getting Nyxt The recommended way to install the stable release of Nyxt for Linux is via Flatpak . (Despite offering an AppImage for preview releases, there is no AppImage for the stable series.) The project also maintains a list of packages for a variety of Linux distributions, but asks that any bugs found in third-party packages be reported to the distribution rather than the Nyxt project. Compiling from source is also an option, of course, and might even be a necessity. The Nyxt Flatpak package would not run on Fedora 41 on a system with an NVIDIA card without disabling WebKit compositing and sandboxing using the following command: $ flatpak run --env=WEBKIT_DISABLE_COMPOSITING_MODE=1 \ --env=WEBKIT_DISABLE_SANDBOX_THIS_IS_DANGEROUS=1 \ engineer.atlas.Nyxt Starting Nyxt with a variable that explicitly informs the user "this is dangerous" seemed unwise over the long term, so I went ahead and compiled Nyxt myself for that machine. The developer manual has information on dependencies that might be needed and that are unlikely to be installed by default. To enable copy and paste functions under Wayland, it will be necessary to install the Wayland clipboard utilities in addition to any dependencies needed to compile Nyxt. On Fedora, this is the wl-clipboard package. For this article, I primarily used Nyxt 3.12, though I did spend some time with the 4.0.x preview releases as well. As one might expect, they are still too unstable to use full-time. Getting started When Nyxt is started, it displays a page with four buttons: Quick-Start, Describe-Bindings , Manual, and Settings. Unlike Chrome, Firefox, and other popular web browsers, Nyxt does not have a point-and-click interface for all (or even most) of its features; the expectation is that users are going to do almost everything from the keyboard, and much of Nyxt's functionality is only accessible by using key combinations or entering commands. Users can still use the mouse to click links, etc., but there are no buttons to open new windows, add bookmarks, and no URL bar or location bar to type "lwn.net" into. The quick start introduces some of the concepts that set Nyxt apart from other browsers. Instead of tabs, Nyxt has buffers . In practice, buffers are similar to tabs, except that a Nyxt buffer can have its own behavior and settings. For instance, users can set a buffer's keybindings individually to use a different set than the global default. Likewise, a buffer can use different modes —which are similar to Emacs modes. Nyxt commands are invoked with keybindings or by bringing up the prompt buffer and typing the command to be used. Users can summon the prompt buffer with Ctrl-Space and Alt-x if using Emacs mode or : in vi mode. Users can see the modes that are enabled in a buffer by bringing up the prompt buffer and using the toggle-modes command. The Settings page, which can be opened from the Nyxt start page or by running the common-settings command in the prompt buffer, has several tabs for configuring high-level Nyxt options. These include the browser's default keybindings, the theme (dark or light), its privacy settings, and the text editor. Nyxt comes with an ad-blocker mode, but it needs to be enabled in the privacy settings. Users can also set the cookie policy, turn on the reduce-tracking mode, and turn off JavaScript if desired with the no-script mode. And, of course, each of these settings can be enabled or disabled on a per-buffer basis as well. Even though Nyxt developers have a strong preference for Emacs, it is set to use CUA keybindings by default. Folks who prefer Emacs or vi-like bindings will want to change the keybinding setting and restart the browser for that to take effect. (Note that users can change the keybindings (or other modes) in a buffer without having to restart—a restart is only required for the global setting.) It's best to do this early, rather than committing the CUA keybindings to memory and then relearning them later for vi or Emacs. It will likely make Nyxt more intuitive as well—I found that it was relatively easy to make the move from Firefox with Vimium to Nyxt. The CUA bindings, aside from some familiar ones like Ctrl-l to enter a URL to browse to, were much harder (for me, anyway) to commit to memory. Over the years, a lot of work has been done to reduce the amount of space that is taken up by browser "chrome"—that is, the user-interface components (UI) such as window title bars, toolbars, tabs, and so forth—to maximize the amount of space available for the web pages being viewed. Nyxt solves this by having almost no UI at all while browsing, though there are a few tiny buttons in a small toolbar at the bottom of the Nyxt window. The toolbar has elements for navigating backward or forward, reloading the page, raising the command prompt, and for displaying the modes enabled in each buffer. Nyxt also has a minimal right-click menu that lets users move one page backward or forward in a buffer, reload a buffer, or bring up the WebKit Inspector tools . One feature Nyxt has that other browser makers should copy is the history tree. Running the history-tree command will bring up a navigable tree-type visualization of the browser's history across all buffers. This not only lets users trace their steps and quickly hop back (or forward) to pages they've visited, Nyxt can operate on the history with other commands, such as bookmark-buffer-url to bookmark pages that are currently open in the browser. Just as with Emacs and Vim, users can operate on multiple buffers at once. After a long browsing session, for instance, one might have 20 pages open from Wikipedia after going down a rabbit hole about a topic. Open the command buffer, enter the delete-buffer command, and Nyxt wi
