---
id: 28
url: https://www.thecodedmessage.com/posts/oop-3-inheritance/
title: 'Rust Is Beyond Object-Oriented, Part 3: Inheritance :: The Coded Message'
domain: www.thecodedmessage.com
source_date: '2026-01-07'
tags:
- rust
- tutorial
summary: This article argues that inheritance, one of the three traditional pillars
  of Object-Oriented Programming, is fundamentally flawed and unnecessary in Rust.
  The author clarifies that he opposes inheritance with shared fields (not interface
  implementation), explaining that "is a" inheritance is merely syntactic sugar for
  "has a" composition—making parent class fields implicit rather than explicit. The
  piece advocates for Rust's approach of using traits for polymorphism and explicit
  struct composition instead of inheritance, which provides clearer, more maintainable
  code.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Rust Is Beyond Object-Oriented, Part 3: Inheritance :: The Coded Message

Rust Is Beyond Object-Oriented, Part 3: Inheritance 2023-12-07 :: Jimmy Hartzell # programming # computers # Rust # OOP # Beyond OOP In this next 1 post of my series explaining how Rust is better off without Object-Oriented Programming , I discuss the last and (in my opinion) the weirdest of OOP’s 3 traditional pillars. It’s not encapsulation , a great idea which exists in some form in every modern programming language, just OOP does it oddly. It’s not polymorphism , also a great idea that OOP puts too many restrictions on, and that Rust borrows a better design for from Haskell (with syntax from C++). No, it’s that third pillar, inheritance, that I am discussing today, that concept that only shows up in OOP circles, causing no end of problems for your code. Unlike encapsulation and polymorphism, Rust does not have any direct analogue. Side note: In this series in general, but especially in this post, I am primarily discussing static OOP languages, like C++ and Java, where interfaces have to be explicit and where classes correspond to different static types. Much of what I write would have to be adapted to apply to more dynamic “duck-typing” styles of OOP like in Python or JavaScript (or Smalltalk), and won’t apply as directly. This series is about why Rust isn’t OOP, and Rust is closer to C++ or Java than to a dynamic language, so this bias makes sense in context. Why do people like inheritance? # I can see why inheritance is so compelling. The entire system of education encourages us to categorize things into neat little hierarchies. Rectangles are a type of shape, and squares are a type of rectangle. Humans are a type of animal, and men and women are types of humans. Inheritance allows us to take this “X is a Y” and express it to a computer. This “is a” relationship is seen as intuitive. As the entire point of OOP is to make programming more intuitive, more like reasoning about the real world, inheritance is a perfect match for it. Just like we reason about the real world with categories and subcategories, we can reason about the world of our program in a similar way. And this allows us to feel smart when we read introductions to inheritance in various books on OOP programming. We see the Tiger class inherit from the Animal class, or the Rectangle class inherit from the Shape class. We get so excited by the abstract principle of “is a” that we don’t even notice that the examples have nothing to do with programming. We don’t write code about shapes or animals. And even a drawing program or a zoo inventory app wouldn’t use inheritance like this! If inheritance was so useful as to be a pillar of OOP, why are there so few beginner examples that involve things programs actually do? What do I mean by inheritance? # First, let me clarify what I mean by inheritance, or rather what I don’t mean. I don’t mean every subtype-supertype relationship, where all values of one type are also included in another, broader type. Subtyping shows up in Rust all the time, particularly when it comes to lifetimes . I also don’t mean the version of inheritance that only involves implementing an interface. In C++, you implement dynamic interfaces through inheritance as a mechanism, even if the “superclass” is just a list of methods. In Java, inheritance and interface implementation are separate mechanisms. I am not talking about interface implementation as inheritance, even though it is technically considered the same feature in C++: // This class has no fields, only virtual methods. // // In Java, we would call this an interface. In Rust, we would // call this a trait. class Shape { public : virtual void draw(Surface & surface) const = 0 ; }; // This is considered inheritance in C++. The Java equivalent // would use `implements` instead of `extends`. And you could still // do this in Rust with a trait. class Square : public Shape { int size; int x; int y; public : void draw(Surface & surface) const override ; }; I am only opposed to the type of inheritance that is still called inheritance in Java. Having a type implement an interface (a trait in Rust) is perfectly legitimate and still allowed in Rust, as is casting a reference to a value to a generic, “dynamic” value based on that trait or interface: trait Shape { fn draw ( & self, surface: & mut Surface); } struct Square { size: u32 , x: u32 , y: u32 , } impl Shape for Square { fn draw ( & self, surface: & mut Surface) { } } // Assume square is Square, surface is Surface let shape: & dyn Shape = & square; shape.draw( & mut surface); Shape , in this context, is a pure interface. It is only a structured form of polymorphism, not inheritance per se. Very importantly, Shape has no fields. It is defined based solely on what you can do with it. And accordingly, the “is a” language makes sense for interface implementation: Square is a Shape . A Shape has no state, though, just methods, just behaviors. But some parent classes have fields. And that’s when inheritance really starts to have problems: when the “parent” class has fields. It is at this point that inheritance starts to seem really weird. What does inheritance actually do? # In my article on encapsulation , I discussed how a class is secretly two things with the same name, entangled and conflated: A record type (or what Rust would call a struct ), that is, a type whose values consist of a number of fields with fixed names and types A module (a collection of code with enforced encapsulation boundaries), containing that record type and a collection of functions (called “methods”) for interacting with it Inheritance does something different with each of these concepts. To start out, let’s discuss what it does to the record type. We’ll continue using shapes, a classic example for discussing object-oriented features. A circle is a shape, so we can use inheritance here: class Shape { public : Color color; }; class Point { public : int x; int y; }; class Circle : public Shape { public : Point center; int radius; }; So, what does this mean for Circle ? Well, it means that all the fields of Shape (namely, color ) are also fields of Circle . Therefore, references to Circle can be made into references to Shape , as everything you can do with a shape, you can do with a circle, like set the color, or get the color: Circle circle; Shape & shape = circle; shape.color = Color :: Blue; assert(circle.color == Color :: Blue); The thing is, we already have a mechanism of taking all the fields of struct A and putting it in struct B: by putting a field of type A into struct B! Instead of inheritance’s “is a,” we can accomplish the same thing with having a field, or “has a.” In our example, we can do the exact same thing with Point that we did with Shape – it just involves being a little more explicit about what’s going on: Circle circle; Point & point = circle.center; point.x = 3 ; assert(circle.center.x == 3 ); So, what does inheritance do to the classes from the record type perspective? It makes the parent class a field of the child class, just a field with no name. By writing: class Circle : public Shape { // ... … from a record type perspective, we were writing syntactic sugar for: class Circle { public : Shape shape; // ... And when we wrote: Shape & shape = circle; That was translated into something like: Shape & shape = circle.shape; “Is a,” from a record type point of view, is just syntactic sugar for “has a.” If you want to do something similar in Rust, just make a has-a relationship, rather than creating an implicit field with no name. Rust doesn’t like implicit nameless things anyway. This will also save on arguing about whether two types have an “is a” or a “has a” relationship. I regret all the time I’ve spent splitting hairs about that distinction, when really, it’s just a matter of whether we want a field to be implicit or not. OK, so that covers what inheritance does to the record types, but what about the rest of the class, the module? What happens to the methods? Well, for non-virtual methods, it’s also straight-forward. Instead of doing inheritance, you can still just use has-a instead, and do a field access. Instead of calling, say, circle.get_color() , we could always call circle.shape.get_color() . So far, with the fields and non-virtual methods, inheritance just seems a bit weird and overrated. Like, we don’t see any reason yet why a programming language would want to support it, when just having a field of a superclass type does everything. But on the other hand, some people like implicit fields and convenient short-hands, so there’s not much of a downside either. Inheritance without virtual methods may seem harmless, but it doesn’t have much to do with the concept of “is a.” Technically, you can use a field access as an implicit conversion, and think of it as a subtyping relationship, but it doesn’t actually correspond to how the world works. Even in the world of shapes, it doesn’t make sense: if a square is a rectangle, how come it has less state than a rectangle, with only one field for side length instead of two for width and height? But we’ve not yet talked about virtual methods. When we do, you will see why I think inheritance is not just an unnecessary feature, but an ill-conceived anti-feature. But what about the virtual methods? # So, earlier we discussed a class as being two things, a record type (with fields) and a module (with methods and visibility restrictions). But once we consider virtual methods, a class is actually three things with the same name: A record type : each object has the fields A module : the type, trait, and other methods, are all in an encapsulated module A trait or interface : the virtual methods form an interface Side note: some programming languages consider all methods to be virtual for some reason. For these programming languages, everything I say still applies, but all methods are in the trait as they’re all virtual. Given that most methods aren’t self-consciously written with the intent to b
