---
id: 29
url: https://www.thecodedmessage.com/posts/oop-2-polymorphism/
title: 'Rust Is Beyond Object-Oriented, Part 2: Polymorphism :: The Coded Message'
domain: www.thecodedmessage.com
source_date: '2026-01-07'
tags:
- rust
- tutorial
summary: This article explores how Rust's approach to polymorphism differs fundamentally
  from traditional object-oriented programming. While OOP relies heavily on a constrained
  form of runtime polymorphism through vtables that requires heap allocation, indirection,
  and prevents compiler optimizations, Rust offers multiple polymorphism mechanisms
  suited to different situations. The author introduces Rust's alternatives—starting
  with enums (tagged unions)—which can often accomplish what OOP achieves through
  inheritance and runtime polymorphism, but with better performance and ergonomics.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Rust Is Beyond Object-Oriented, Part 2: Polymorphism :: The Coded Message

Rust Is Beyond Object-Oriented, Part 2: Polymorphism 2023-02-07 :: Jimmy Hartzell # programming # Rust # OOP # Beyond OOP # computers In this post, I continue my series on how Rust differs from the traditional object-oriented programming paradigm by discussing the second of the three traditional pillars of OOP: polymorphism. Polymorphism is an especially big topic in object-oriented programming, perhaps the most important of its three pillars. Several books could be (and have been) written on what polymorphism is, how various programming languages have implemented it (both within the OOP world and outside of it – yes, polymorphism exists outside of OOP), how to use it effectively, and when not to use it. Books could be written on how to use the Rust version of it alone. Unfortunately this is just a blog post, so I cannot cover polymorphism in as much detail or variety as I want to. I shall instead focus specifically on how Rust differs from the OOP conceptualization. I will start by describing how it works in OOP, and then discuss how to accomplish the same goals in Rust. In OOP, polymorphism is everything. It tries to take all decision-making (or as much decision-making as possible) and unite it in a common narrow mechanism: run-time polymorphism. But unfortunately, it’s not just any run-time polymorphism, but a specific, narrow form of run-time polymorphism, constrained by OOP philosophy and by details of how the implementations typically work: It requires indirection: Every object must typically be stored on the heap for run-time polymorphism to work, as the different “run-time types” have different sizes. This encourages the aliasing of mutable objects. Not only that, but to actually call a method, it must go through three layers of indirection: dereferencing the object reference, then dereferencing the class pointer or “vtable” pointer, and then doing an indirect function call. It precludes optimization: Beyond the intrinsic cost of an indirect function call, the fact that the call is indirect means that inlining is impossible. Often, the polymorphic methods are small or even trivial, such as returning a constant, setting a field, or re-arranging the parameters and calling another method, so inlining would be useful. Inlining is also important to allow optimizations to cross the inlining boundary. It is polymorphic in one parameter only: The special receiver parameter, called self or this , is the only parameter through which run-time polymorphism is typically possible. Polymorphism on other parameters can be simulated with helper methods in those types, which is awkward, and return-type polymorphism is impossible. Each value is independently polymorphic: In run-time polymorphism, there is often no way to say that all the elements of a collection are of some type T that all implement the same interface, or to say that two parameters to a function are the same type but what that type is should be determined at run-time. It is entangled with other OOP features: In C++, runtime polymorphism is tightly coupled with inheritance. In many OOP programming languages, it is only available for class types, which as I discussed in my previous post are a constrained form of modules. I could write an entire blog post about each of these constraints – perhaps I will someday. But in spite of all these constraints, it is seen as the preferred way of doing decision-making in OOP languages, and as especially intuitive and accesible. Programmers are trained to reach for this tool whenever feasible, whether or not it is the best tool for the decision at hand, even if there is no current need for it to be a run-time decision. Some programming languages, such as Smalltalk, even collapsed “if-then” logic and loops into this one oddly specific decision-making structure, implementing them via polymorphic methods like ifTrue:ifFalse that would be implemented differently in the True and False classes (and therefore on the true and false objects). To be clear, having a mechanism of vtable-based runtime polymorphism isn’t a bad thing per se – Rust even has one (similar, but not quite identical, to the OOP version described above). But the Rust version is used in the relatively rare situations where that mechanism is the best fit, among a whole palette of mechanisms. In OOP, the elevation of this tightly constrained and unperformant form of decision making above all others, and the philosophical assertion that using it is the best way and most intuitive way to express program flow and business logic, is a problem. It turns out that programming is much more ergonomic when you choose the tool most appropriate for the situation at hand – and OOP run-time polymorphism is only occasionally the actual tool for the jobs it is often asked to do. So let’s look at 4 alternatives in Rust that can be used when OOP uses run-time polymorphism. Alternative #0: enum # Not only are there other forms of polymorphism that have strictly fewer constraints (such as Haskell’s typeclasses) or a different set of trade-offs (such as Rust’s traits, heavily based on Haskell typeclasses), there is another decision-making systems in Rust and Haskell, namely algebraic data types (ADTs), or sum types, that also take over many of the applications of OOP-style polymorphism. In Rust, these are known as enum s. enum s in many programming language are lists of constants to be stored in integer-sized types, sometimes implemented in a typesafe fashion (like in Java), sometimes not (like in C), sometimes with either option available (like in C++ with the distinction between enum and enum class ). Rust enum s support this familiar use case, with type-safety: pub enum Visibility { Visible, Invisible, } But they also support additional fields associated with each option, creating what in type theory is known as a “sum type,” but it is better known among C or C++ programmers as a “tagged union” – the difference being that in Rust, the compiler is aware of and enforces the tag. Here’s some examples of some enum declarations: pub enum UserId { Username(String), Anonymous(IpAddress), // ^^ This isn't supposed to be a real network type, // just an example. } let user1 = UserId::Username( "foo" .to_string()); let user2 = UserId::Anonymous(parse_ip( "127.0.0.1" ) ? ); pub enum HostIdentifier { Dns(DomainName), Ipv4Addr(Ipv4Addr), Ipv6Addr(Ipv6Addr), } pub enum Location { Nowhere, Address(Address), Coordinates { lat: f64 , long: f64 , } } let loc1 = Location::Nowhere; let loc2 = Location::Coordinates { lat: 80.0 , long: 40.0 , }; What do these tagged unions have to do with polymorphism, you may ask? Well, most OOP languages don’t have good syntax for these sum types, but they do have powerful mechanisms for run-time polymorphism, and so you’ll see run-time polymorphism used for situations where Rust enum s would actually be just as well-suited (and I will argue, better suited): when there’s a few options for how to store a value, but those options contain different details. For example, here’s one way to represent the UserId type in Java using inheritance and run-time polymorphism – how I would’ve done it when I was a student (putting each class in a different file): class UserId { } class Username extends UserId { private String username; public Username (String username) { this . username = username; } // ... getters, setters, etc. } class AnonymousUser extends UserId { private Ipv4Address ipAddress; // ... constructor, getters, setters, etc. } UserId user1 = new Username( "foo" ); UserId user2 = new AnonymousUser( new Ipv4Address( "127.0.0.1" )); Importantly, just as in the enum example, we can put user1 and user2 in variables of the same type, and can pass them to the same kinds of functions, and in general do the same operations on them. Now, these OOP-style classes look super-light to the point of being silly, but that’s mostly because we haven’t added any real operational code to this situation – just data and structure and a bit of variable definitions and boilerplate. Let’s consider what happens if we actually do anything with user IDs. For example, we might want to determine whether they’re an administrator. In our hypothetical, let’s say anonymous users are never administrators, and users with usernames are only administrators if the username begins with the string admin_ . The doctrinally approved object-oriented way of doing that is to add a method, e.g. isAdministrator . In order for this method to work, we have to add it to all three classes, the base class and the two child classes: class UserId { // ... public abstract bool isAdministrator (); } class Username extends UserId { // ... public bool isAdministrator () { return username. startsWith ( "admin_" ); } } class AnonymousUser extends UserId { // ... public bool isAdminstrator () { return false ; } } So, in order to add this simple operation, this simple capability to this type in Java, we have to go to three classes, which will be stored in three files. Each of them contains a method that does something simple, but nowhere can the entire logic be seen of who is and isn’t an administrator – something that someone might naturally ask. Rust would use match for such an operation, putting all the information about it in one place: fn is_administrator (user: & UserId ) -> bool { match user { UserId::Username(name) => name.starts_with( "admin_" ), UserId::AnonymousUser(_) => false , } } This yields a more complicated individual function, but it has all the logic explicitly right there. Having the logic be explicit, instead of implicit in an inheritance hierarchy, cuts against an OOP precept where methods should be simple and polymorphism used to express the logic implicitly. But that doesn’t help guarantee anything, just sweeps it under the rug: It turns out that hiding the complexity makes it harder to grapple with, not easier. Let’s go through another example. We’ve had this UserId code for a while, and you’re tasked
