---
id: 155
url: https://norvig.com/sudoku.html
title: Solving Every Sudoku Puzzle
domain: norvig.com
source_date: '2025-11-10'
tags:
- python
- tutorial
- academic-paper
summary: 'Peter Norvig''s essay presents an elegant solution to solving any Sudoku
  puzzle using just one to three pages of Python code based on two key techniques:
  **constraint propagation** and **search**. The approach models Sudoku as a constraint
  satisfaction problem by representing each square''s possible values and systematically
  eliminating options through two strategies: removing a digit from peers when a square
  has only one possible value, and placing a value in the only available square within
  a unit. The solution is implemented in Python by defining the puzzle structure (squares,
  units, and peers) and parsing puzzles into a dictionary representation that tracks
  possible digit values for each square.'
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Solving Every Sudoku Puzzle

Solving Every Sudoku Puzzle by Peter Norvig Note: This page is the original 2006 essay; an updated Python 3 Jupyter notebook is available here and should probably be read instead of this page. In this essay I tackle the problem of solving every Sudoku puzzle. It turns out to be quite easy (about one page of code for the main idea and two pages for embellishments) using two ideas: constraint propagation and search . Sudoku Notation and Preliminary Notions First we have to agree on some notation. A Sudoku puzzle is a grid of 81 squares; the majority of enthusiasts label the columns 1-9, the rows A-I, and call a collection of nine squares (column, row, or box) a unit and the squares that share a unit the peers . A puzzle leaves some squares blank and fills others with digits, and the whole idea is: A puzzle is solved if the squares in each unit are filled with a permutation of the digits 1 to 9. That is, no digit can appear twice in a unit, and every digit must appear once. This implies that each square must have a different value from any of its peers. Here are the names of the squares, a typical puzzle, and the solution to the puzzle: A1 A2 A3| A4 A5 A6| A7 A8 A9 4 . . |. . . |8 . 5 4 1 7 |3 6 9 |8 2 5 B1 B2 B3| B4 B5 B6| B7 B8 B9 . 3 . |. . . |. . . 6 3 2 |1 5 8 |9 4 7 C1 C2 C3| C4 C5 C6| C7 C8 C9 . . . |7 . . |. . . 9 5 8 |7 2 4 |3 1 6 ---------+---------+--------- ------+------+------ ------+------+------ D1 D2 D3| D4 D5 D6| D7 D8 D9 . 2 . |. . . |. 6 . 8 2 5 |4 3 7 |1 6 9 E1 E2 E3| E4 E5 E6| E7 E8 E9 . . . |. 8 . |4 . . 7 9 1 |5 8 6 |4 3 2 F1 F2 F3| F4 F5 F6| F7 F8 F9 . . . |. 1 . |. . . 3 4 6 |9 1 2 |7 5 8 ---------+---------+--------- ------+------+------ ------+------+------ G1 G2 G3| G4 G5 G6| G7 G8 G9 . . . |6 . 3 |. 7 . 2 8 9 |6 4 3 |5 7 1 H1 H2 H3| H4 H5 H6| H7 H8 H9 5 . . |2 . . |. . . 5 7 3 |2 9 1 |6 8 4 I1 I2 I3| I4 I5 I6| I7 I8 I9 1 . 4 |. . . |. . . 1 6 4 |8 7 5 |2 9 3 Every square has exactly 3 units and 20 peers. For example, here are the units and peers for the square C2 : A2 | | | | A1 A2 A3| | B2 | | | | B1 B2 B3| | C2 | | C1 C2 C3| C4 C5 C6| C7 C8 C9 C1 C2 C3| | ---------+---------+--------- ---------+---------+--------- ---------+---------+--------- D2 | | | | | | E2 | | | | | | F2 | | | | | | ---------+---------+--------- ---------+---------+--------- ---------+---------+--------- G2 | | | | | | H2 | | | | | | I2 | | | | | | We can implement the notions of units, peers, and squares in the programming language Python (2.5 or later) as follows: def cross(A, B): "Cross product of elements in A and elements in B." return [a+b for a in A for b in B] digits = '123456789' rows = 'ABCDEFGHI' cols = digits squares = cross(rows, cols) unitlist = ([cross(rows, c) for c in cols] + [cross(r, cols) for r in rows] + [cross(rs, cs) for rs in ('ABC','DEF','GHI') for cs in ('123','456','789')]) units = dict((s, [u for u in unitlist if s in u]) for s in squares) peers = dict((s, set(sum(units[s],[]))-set([s])) for s in squares) If you are not familiar with some of the features of Python, note that a dict or dictionary is Python's name for a hash table that maps each key to a value; that these are specified as a sequence of (key, value) tuples; that dict((s, [...]) for s in squares) creates a dictionary which maps each square s to a value that is the list [...] ; and that the expression [u for u in unitlist if s in u] means that this value is the list of units u such that the square s is a member of u . So read this assignment statement as " units is a dictionary where each square maps to the list of units that contain the square". Similarly, read the next assignment statement as " peers is a dictionary where each square s maps to the set of squares formed by the union of the squares in the units of s , but not s itself". It can't hurt to throw in some tests (they all pass): def test(): "A set of unit tests." assert len(squares) == 81 assert len(unitlist) == 27 assert all(len(units[s]) == 3 for s in squares) assert all(len(peers[s]) == 20 for s in squares) assert units['C2'] == [['A2', 'B2', 'C2', 'D2', 'E2', 'F2', 'G2', 'H2', 'I2'], ['C1', 'C2', 'C3', 'C4', 'C5', 'C6', 'C7', 'C8', 'C9'], ['A1', 'A2', 'A3', 'B1', 'B2', 'B3', 'C1', 'C2', 'C3']] assert peers['C2'] == set(['A2', 'B2', 'D2', 'E2', 'F2', 'G2', 'H2', 'I2', 'C1', 'C3', 'C4', 'C5', 'C6', 'C7', 'C8', 'C9', 'A1', 'A3', 'B1', 'B3']) print 'All tests pass.' Now that we have squares, units, and peers, the next step is to define the Sudoku playing grid. Actually we need two representations: First, a textual format used to specify the initial state of a puzzle; we will reserve the name grid for this. Second, an internal representation of any state of a puzzle, partially solved or complete; this we will call a values collection because it will give all the remaining possible values for each square. For the textual format ( grid ) we'll allow a string of characters with 1-9 indicating a digit, and a 0 or period specifying an empty square. All other characters are ignored (including spaces, newlines, dashes, and bars). So each of the following three grid strings represent the same puzzle: "4.....8.5.3..........7......2.....6.....8.4......1.......6.3.7.5..2.....1.4......" """ 400000805 030000000 000700000 020000060 000080400 000010000 000603070 500200000 104000000""" """ 4 . . |. . . |8 . 5 . 3 . |. . . |. . . . . . |7 . . |. . . ------+------+------ . 2 . |. . . |. 6 . . . . |. 8 . |4 . . . . . |. 1 . |. . . ------+------+------ . . . |6 . 3 |. 7 . 5 . . |2 . . |. . . 1 . 4 |. . . |. . . """ Now for values . One might think that a 9 x 9 array would be the obvious data structure. But squares have names like 'A1' , not (0,0) . Therefore, values will be a dict with squares as keys. The value of each key will be the possible digits for that square: a single digit if it was given as part of the puzzle definition or if we have figured out what it must be, and a collection of several digits if we are still uncertain. This collection of digits could be represented by a Python set or list , but I chose instead to use a string of digits (we'll see why later). So a grid where A1 is 7 and C7 is empty would be represented as {'A1': '7', 'C7': '123456789', ...} . Here is the code to parse a grid into a values dict: def parse_grid(grid): """Convert grid to a dict of possible values, {square: digits}, or return False if a contradiction is detected.""" ## To start, every square can be any digit; then assign values from the grid. values = dict((s, digits) for s in squares) for s,d in grid_values(grid).items(): if d in digits and not assign(values, s, d): return False ## (Fail if we can't assign d to square s.) return values def grid_values(grid): "Convert grid into a dict of {square: char} with '0' or '.' for empties." chars = [c for c in grid if c in digits or c in '0.'] assert len(chars) == 81 return dict(zip(squares, chars)) Constraint Propagation The function parse_grid calls assign(values, s, d) . We could implement this as values[s] = d , but we can do more than just that. Those with experience solving Sudoku puzzles know that there are two important strategies that we can use to make progress towards filling in all the squares: (1) If a square has only one possible value, then eliminate that value from the square's peers. (2) If a unit has only one possible place for a value, then put the value there. As an example of strategy (1) if we assign 7 to A1 , yielding {'A1': '7', 'A2':'123456789', ...} , we see that A1 has only one value, and thus the 7 can be removed from its peer A2 (and all other peers), giving us {'A1': '7', 'A2': '12345689', ...} . As an example of strategy (2), if it turns out that none of A3 through A9 has a 3 as a possible value, then the 3 must belong in A2 , and we can update to {'A1': '7', 'A2':'3', ...} . These updates to A2 may in turn cause further updates to its peers, and the peers of those peers, and so on. This process is called constraint propagation . The function assign(values, s, d) will return the updated values (including the updates from constraint propagation), but if there is a contradiction--if the assignment cannot be made consistently--then assign returns False . For example, if a grid starts with the digits '77...' then when we try to assign the 7 to A2 , assign would notice that 7 is not a possibility for A2 , because it was eliminated by the peer, A1 . It turns out that the fundamental operation is not assigning a value, but rather eliminating one of the possible values for a square, which we implement with eliminate(values, s, d) . Once we have eliminate , then assign(values, s, d) can be defined as "eliminate all the values from s except d ". def assign(values, s, d): """Eliminate all the other values (except d) from values[s] and propagate. Return values, except return False if a contradiction is detected.""" other_values = values[s].replace(d, '') if all(eliminate(values, s, d2) for d2 in other_values): return values else: return False def eliminate(values, s, d): """Eliminate d from values[s]; propagate when values or places <= 2. Return values, except return False if a contradiction is detected.""" if d not in values[s]: return values ## Already eliminated values[s] = values[s].replace(d,'') ## (1) If a square s is reduced to one value d2, then eliminate d2 from the peers. if len(values[s]) == 0: return False ## Contradiction: removed last value elif len(values[s]) == 1: d2 = values[s] if not all(eliminate(values, s2, d2) for s2 in peers[s]): return False ## (2) If a unit u is reduced to only one place for a value d, then put it there. for u in units[s]: dplaces = [s for s in u if d in values[s]] if len(dplaces) == 0: return False ## Contradiction: no place for this value elif len(dplaces) == 1: # d can only be in one place in unit; assign it there if not assign(values, dplaces[0], d): return False return values Now before we can go much further, we will need to display a puzzle: def display(values): "Display these val
