---
id: 244
url: https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2025/09/the-ruliology-of-lambdas/
title: The Ruliology of Lambdas&mdash;Stephen Wolfram Writings
domain: writings.stephenwolfram.com
source_date: '2025-09-19'
tags:
- lisp
- compilers
- academic-paper
summary: Stephen Wolfram explores the computational theory and behavior of lambda
  functions—abstract computational constructs originating from Alonzo Church's work
  in the 1930s. The article examines how lambdas operate through beta reduction (substituting
  arguments into function bodies), discusses notation systems like de Bruijn indices
  to avoid variable naming issues, and reveals that despite their simplicity, lambdas
  exhibit rich and complex computational behavior. Wolfram emphasizes that lambdas
  have significant applications in practical computing while also presenting interesting
  mathematical properties, including the Church-Rosser property that guarantees unique
  evaluation results.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# The Ruliology of Lambdas&mdash;Stephen Wolfram Writings

Contents Top What Are Lambdas? Basic Computation with Lambdas Ways to Write Lambdas Enumerating Lambdas The Evaluation of Lambdas The World of Larger Lambdas The Issue of Undecidability Numerically Interpretable Lambdas Multiway Graphs for Lambda Evaluation Different Evaluation Strategies The Equivalence of Lambdas Causality for Lambdas Multiway Causal Graphs The Case of Linear Lambdas Lambdas versus Combinators Bibliographic Note Thanks The Ruliology of Lambdas The Ruliology of Lambdas » (VIDEO) The Ruliology of Lambdas September 15, 2025 Click any diagram to get Wolfram Language code to reproduce it. What Are Lambdas? It’s a story of pure, abstract computation. In fact, historically, one of the very first . But even though it’s something I for one have used in practice for nearly half a century, it’s not something that in all my years of exploring simple computational systems and ruliology I’ve ever specifically studied. And, yes, it involves some fiddly technical details. But it’ll turn out that lambdas—like so many systems I’ve explored—have a rich ruliology, made particularly significant by their connection to practical computing. In Wolfram Language it’s the Function function. Back when Alonzo Church first discussed it in the 1930s he called it λ (lambda). The idea is to have something that serves as a “ pure function ”—which can be applied to an argument to give a value. For example, in the Wolfram Language one might have: On its own it’s just a symbolic expression that evaluates to itself. But if we apply it to an argument then it substitutes that argument into its body, and then evaluates that body: In the Wolfram Language we can also write this as: Or, with λ = Function , we can write which is close to Church’s original notation (λ x .(1 + x )) 8. But what if we want to “go even purer”, and effectively just “use λ for everything”—without any pre-defined functions like Plus ( + )? To set up lambdas at all, we have to have a notion of function application (as in f[x] meaning “apply f to x ”). So, for example, here’s a lambda (“pure function”) that just has a structure defined by function application: Can we do familiar operations with this kind of setup? Let’s imagine we have a symbol z that represents 0, and another symbol s that represents the operation of computing a successor. Then here’s a representation of the integers 0 through 5: But let’s look for example at s[s[s[s[z]]]] . We can “factor out” the s and z in this expression and write the “purely structural” part just in terms of lambdas: But in a sense we don’t need the s and z here; we can perfectly well set up a representation for integers just in terms of lambdas, say as (often known as “ Church numerals ”): It’s all very pure—and abstract. And, at least at first, it seems very clean. But pretty soon one runs into a serious problem. If we were to write what would it mean? In x[x] are the x ’s associated with the x in the inner λ or the outer one? Typing such an expression into the Wolfram Language, x ’s turn red to indicate that there’s a problem: And at this level the only way to resolve the problem is to use different names for the two x ’s—for example: But ultimately the particular names one uses don’t matter. For example, swapping x and y represents exactly the same function as before. How can one deal with this? One approach—that was actually invented more than a decade before lambdas , and that I in fact wrote a whole book about a few years ago—is to use so-called “ combinators ”: constructs S and K that in effect abstractly define how to rearrange symbolic expressions, without having to name anything, or, for that matter, introduce variables at all. So, for example, λ[x, λ[y, y[x]]] can be written as one can confirm using: At some level this is very elegant. But, yes, it’s extremely difficult to read. So is there a way to preserve at least some of the comparative readability of lambdas without having to explicitly introduce variables with names, etc.? It turns out there is. And it starts from the observation that a named variable (say x ) is basically just a way of referring back to the particular lambda (say λ[x, … ] ) that introduced that variable. And the idea is that rather than making that reference using a named variable, we make it instead by saying “structurally” where the lambda is relative to whatever is referring to it. So, for example, given we can write this in the “de Bruijn index” (pronounced “de broin”) form where the 1 says that the variable in that position is associated with the λ that’s “one λ back” in the expression, while that 2 says that the variable in that position is “two λ’s back” in the expression: So, for example, our version of the integers as lambdas can now be written as: OK, so lambdas can represent things (like integers). But can one “compute with lambdas”? Or, put another way, what can pure lambdas do? Fundamentally, there’s just one operation—usually called beta reduction—that takes whatever argument a lambda is given, and explicitly “injects it” into the body of the lambda, in effect implementing the “structural” part of applying a function to its argument. A very simple example of beta reduction is which is equivalent to the standard Wolfram Language evaluation: In terms of de Bruijn indices this becomes which can again be “evaluated” (using beta reduction) to be: This seems like a very simple operation. But, as we’ll see, when applied repeatedly, it can lead to all sorts of complex behavior and interesting structure. And the key to this turns out to be the possibility of lambdas appearing as arguments of other lambdas, and through beta reduction being injected into their bodies. But as soon as one injects one lambda into another, there are tricky issues that arise. If one writes everything explicitly with variables, there’s usually variable renaming that has to be done, with, for example evaluating to: In terms of de Bruijn indices there’s instead renumbering to be done, so that evaluates to: It’s easy to describe informally what beta reduction is doing. In Wolfram Language terms it’s basically just the transformation: In other words, given λ[ x , body ][ y ] , beta reduction is replacing every instance of x in body with y , and returning the result. But it’s not quite as simple as that. For example, if y contains a lambda—as in the example above—then we may have to do a certain amount of renaming of variables (usually called “alpha conversion”). And, yes, there can potentially be a cascade of renamings. And you might have to come up with an arbitrary number of distinct new names to use in these renamings. And once you’ve done the substitution (“beta reduction”) of λ[ x , body ][ y ] this can “expose” another lambda in which you have to do more substitution, and so on. This might sound like a detail. But actually it’s quite fundamental—and it’s what lets lambdas represent computations that “keep running”, and that give rise to the rich ruliology we’ll discuss here. Is it somehow easier to do beta reduction with de Bruijn indices? No, not really. Yes, you don’t have to invent names for variables. But instead you have to do rather fiddly recursive realignment of indices whenever you’re in effect inserting or deleting lambdas. There’s another issue as well. As we’ll explore in detail later, there are often multiple beta reductions that can be done on a given lambda. And if we trace all the possibilities we get a whole multiway graph of possible “paths of lambda evaluation”. But a fundamental fact about lambdas (known as confluence or the Church–Rosser property , and related to causal invariance ) is that if a sequence of beta reductions for a given lambda eventually reaches a fixed point (which, as we’ll see, it doesn’t always), that fixed point will be unique: in other words, evaluating the lambda will always give a definite result (or “normal form”). So what should one call the things one does when one’s working with lambdas? In Wolfram Language we talk of the process of, say, turning Function[x, x[x]][a] (or λ[x, x[x]][a] ) into a[a] as “evaluation”. But sometimes it’s instead called, for example, reduction or conversion or substitution or rewriting. In Wolfram Language we might also call λ[ … ] a “λ expression”, but it’s also sometimes called a λ term. What about what’s inside it? In λ[ x , body ] the x is usually called a “bound variable”. (If there’s a variable—say y —that appears in body and that hasn’t been “bound” (or “scoped”) by a λ, it’s called a “free variable”. The λ expressions that we’ll be discussing here normally have no free variables; such λ expressions are often called “closed λ terms”. ) Putting a lambda around something—as in λ[ x , thing ] —is usually called “λ abstraction”, or just “abstraction”, and the λ itself is sometimes called the “abstractor”. Within the “body” of a lambda, applying x to y to form x[y] is—not surprisingly—usually called an “application” (and, as we’ll discuss later, it can be represented as x@y or x•y ). What about operations on lambdas? Historically three are identified: α reduction (or α conversion), β reduction (or β conversion) and η reduction (or η conversion). β reduction—which we discussed above—is really the core “evaluation-style” operation (e.g. replacing λ[x, f[x]][y] with f[y] ). α and η reduction are, in a sense, “symbolic housekeeping operations”; α reduction is the renaming of variables, while η reduction is the reduction of λ[x, f[x]] to f alone. (In principle one could also imagine other reductions—say transformations directly defined for λ[_][_][_] —though these aren’t traditional for lambdas.) The actual part of a lambda on which a reduction is done is often called a “redex”; the rest of the lambda is then the “context”—or “an expression with a hole”. In what we’ll be doing here, we’ll mostly be concerned with the—fundamentally computational—process of progressively evaluating/reducing/converting/… lambdas. But a lot of the formal
