---
id: 30
url: https://www.thecodedmessage.com/posts/pl-features/
title: 'What Features Should Rust Include? Part I: Not Inheritance. :: The Coded Message'
domain: www.thecodedmessage.com
source_date: '2026-01-07'
tags:
- rust
- compilers
summary: This article discusses programming language design principles, arguing that
  Rust deliberately excludes inheritance not out of tradition but through rigorous
  feature evaluation. The author contends that good language design requires features
  to work cohesively together, respect core invariants, and clear a high bar of necessity—prioritizing
  clarity and collective engineering over individual convenience. Using inheritance
  as an example, the piece illustrates how Rust, influenced by functional programming
  rather than OOP, evaluates potential features neutrally rather than assuming they
  should be included by default.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# What Features Should Rust Include? Part I: Not Inheritance. :: The Coded Message

What Features Should Rust Include? Part I: Not Inheritance. 2025-07-19 :: Jimmy Hartzell # programming # computers # Rust # OOP # Beyond OOP # Rust Features Programming language design, like API design, and computer UX design (especially for technical tools like build systems and admin systems) is a difficult form of engineering, bridging computer science and cognitive science. Sometimes, it’s more art than science, because building systems that other technical workers will use comes with nearly infinite trade-offs and judgment calls. The effort and quality matter too. Different programming languages have different strengths and weaknesses. Some programming languages are hard to use correctly, like C++. Some are easy to write, but hard to then read and maintain, like Perl. Some programming languages are great for one-off scripts where you’re the only user, like Python, and others enforce that you follow reliable engineering principles, like Rust. And some programming languages are just better than others . C++11, for example, is miles better than previous versions of C++ – what do you even do with standard collection types if you can’t do move operations? I would also argue – and have argued – that Rust is similarly a better C++ than C++ at almost any use case (partially because its move operation makes more sense ). This mostly has to do with what features are available in a programming language. Pre-C++11 versions of C++ lacked a feature (move operations) that turn out to be essential in combination with other features (such as RAII). Some features give the user more power, like move operations or inheritance, whereas others help the user by preventing them from accidentally doing something that’s probably a mistake, like linting or type checking. How to Decide # So, how do we make decisions on which features to include and which to exclude? A good programming language has features that work well together, where you can use them in combination with each other and everything makes sense, and where it’s pretty easy to determine which feature to use for a given situation. Some are lightweight, like C, which I consider a good programming language. Some are more feature-heavy, like Rust, or Haskell. But in all of these cases, the feature set is curated, as is each individual feature, to do more good than harm. A bad programming language has overlapping, incompatible features. It has so many features that no one knows all of them well, so that reading someone else’s code can end up looking like reading another programming language because they use a different subset, or so that you have to consider every feature when writing your code. Or, it has missing features that really are implied by features it already has, or that fix gaps for which the work-arounds are ugly. Beyond just increasing cognitive load, there are also often specific downsides to including a feature, especially a complicated one. In a safe language, complex features can introduce safety issues, including ones missed by the language designers. In many languages, features can also be “viral” – once you have async , for example, it propagates up the function chain through function coloring . And once you’ve solved a problem one way, you foreclose better solutions. A programming language needs to have invariants, things programmers can always rely on. In Rust, all types are trivially moveable. In Rust, you cannot override the assignment operator ( = ), so you’ll never have to guess what it means in context. In Java, (at least traditionally) all types but a short list have reference semantics, and alias by default. New features have to respect these old invariants. All of this together means, that there is a bar that every feature in a well-designed programming language has to clear. It’s not enough that a feature might ever be a more convenient way to express a use case, it also has to be a clearer way, a way that combines well with the other features of the programming language. If the programming languages already has other features to express that use case, how does the new feature compare? TMTOWDI vs One True Way # Having only one major feature per use case is a controversial principle. Famously, Perl disowned it, with its motto TMTOWTDI, “There’s more than one way to do it,” which among other decisions led to Perl being derided (with a fair amount of truth) as a “write-only programming language.” Python, which entered into existence as a “scripting language” at a time when Perl was the king of scripting languages, explicitly took the opposite approach of there being “one true way.” I can see the advantages of the Perl approach. I used to really like Perl, back when it was a serious (perhaps the serious) option for many use cases. Programming with a smörgåsbord of choices is super pleasant, turning the experience into a matter of self-expression, designing your own idiom out of the subset of features that you choose, out of comfort or just raw coolness factor. But programming in most settings – and certainly in the systems programming settings for which Rust is primarily designed – is a collective rather than an individual task. Systems programming specifically is almost always an exercise in collaborative engineering, not in self-expression or convenience or customization to our idiosyncratic preferences of aesthetic/convenience. Programmer choice for its own sake is of marginal value at best, and a positive hindrance in many circumstances. In light of this, Rust goes more with Python than with Perl. The programming language is trying to provide a feature set that works well together, not a feature set with every bell and whistle that some other programming language might have. Rust values clarity and readability over convenience, and so if a feature would just save a few lines of typing, that’s probably not a good enough reason to include it. There are some overlapping features in Rust, but few are truly redundant for Rust’s core use case as a systems programming language. Rust requires control over memory layouts and performance, and many overlapping features (such as static and dynamic polymorphism, or arrays and vectors) have different memory layout and performance properties. The differences in semantics reflect real differences in implementation strategy. And, to the extent that they can be, these features are implemented in compatible ways: static and dynamic polymorphism both use traits (with some traits just not eligible for dynamic polymorphism), and arrays and vectors can both be used with slices and iterators. Inheritance in Rust? # I am being somewhat abstract here, so let me give an example: Inheritance. You may come from an OOP background, as many programmers do. You may also have a status quo bias in how you think about programming, as most humans do (it’s an adaptive cognitive strategy, even if it’s not always helpful). From such a perspective, it’s easy to assume that inheritance should be included in a programming language unless there’s a strong reason to exclude it. But Rust does not come from an OOP tradition. It is heavily influenced by Haskell, a functional programming language. Its other major influence, C++, has been moving away from OOP for a long time, adding functional features and new forms of polymorphism based on templates rather than inheritance and late binding. So when the designers of Rust consider features like inheritance, they consider them from a more neutral perspective. Being a pillar of OOP is not a strong reason to include it. Instead, it’s treated like every other feature. If anything, the status quo bias here reads in the opposite direction. The status quo for Rust is that Rust currently does not include inheritance. The burden of proof on someone saying that Rust should include a feature is on the person advocating for the feature. And there is a high bar for including new features in Rust, and for good reason. Inheritance doesn’t clear this bar. Everything inheritance provides, other features can do just as well, usually better. Maybe there are a few edge cases where inheritance saves you a little bit of typing, but there are also plenty of cases where inheritance is overkill and both a sign of and a cause of overengineering. Features Redundant to Inheritance # When I program in C++, I use inheritance sometimes, in spite of valid criticisms against it within the C++ world . When I program in Rust, I never miss it, because of other features Rust already has for every use case. In order to justify including inheritance in Rust, it would have to provide something that these other features don’t. I use inheritance when I need to create a type where the data might have many possible shapes. For example, I might want a base class ProtocolMessage , with subclasses for every concrete message type. Then, there would be a polymorhpic method to serialize each method’s particular fields, perhaps called by a non-polymorhpic method that also serializes header fields and sends them over a wire. In Rust, I would use an enum for this, or a combination of a struct and an enum . Instead of a polymorphic method, I would use a match statement. I like this structure much better. I also use inheritance in C++ to implement dynamic polymorphism. Though other techniques exist, especially in more modern versions of C++, inheritance has built-in programming language support and is therefore less work. (Also, some of the other techniques still use inheritance as an implementation layer.) When doing so, I usually just have virtual and non-virtual methods in the base class, and no fields – essentially using the subset of C++ inheritance that is an exact match for Rust dyn-compatible traits. Finally, I use inheritance in C++ to interact with existing inheritance-based designs. These are usually situations where inheritance is set up by a framework library, and the framework library expects you to use inheritance to fill in your
