---
id: 175
url: https://spidermonkey.dev/blog/2025/10/28/iongraph-web.html
title: Who needs Graphviz when you can build it yourself? | SpiderMonkey JavaScript/WebAssembly
  Engine
domain: spidermonkey.dev
source_date: '2025-10-29'
tags:
- javascript
- compilers
- tutorial
summary: SpiderMonkey's developers created a custom graph layout algorithm called
  iongraph to replace Graphviz for visualizing their JavaScript compiler's optimization
  process. Unlike general-purpose tools like Graphviz, iongraph was specifically designed
  for control flow graphs and produces more intuitive, stable visualizations that
  better reflect the source code structure while remaining interactive and fast (implemented
  in under 1,000 lines of JavaScript). The algorithm leverages domain-specific knowledge
  about compiler graphs—such as reducible control flow and explicitly labeled loop
  backedges—to simplify the traditional Sugiyama layout algorithm and deliver superior
  results for their specific use case.
fetch_status: success
summarizer_model: global.anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5-20251001-v1:0
---

# Who needs Graphviz when you can build it yourself? | SpiderMonkey JavaScript/WebAssembly Engine

We recently overhauled our internal tools for visualizing the compilation of JavaScript and WebAssembly. When SpiderMonkey’s optimizing compiler, Ion, is active, we can now produce interactive graphs showing exactly how functions are processed and optimized. You can play with these graphs right here on this page. Simply write some JavaScript code in the test function and see what graph is produced. You can click and drag to navigate, ctrl-scroll to zoom, and drag the slider at the bottom to scrub through the optimization process. As you experiment, take note of how stable the graph layout is, even as the sizes of blocks change or new structures are added. Try clicking a block's title to select it, then drag the slider and watch the graph change while the block remains in place. Or, click an instruction's number to highlight it so you can keep an eye on it across passes. Prev Next We are not the first to visualize our compiler’s internal graphs, of course, nor the first to make them interactive. But I was not satisfied with the output of common tools like Graphviz or Mermaid , so I decided to create a layout algorithm specifically tailored to our needs. The resulting algorithm is simple, fast, produces surprisingly high-quality output, and can be implemented in less than a thousand lines of code. The purpose of this article is to walk you through this algorithm and the design concepts behind it. Read this post on desktop to see an interactive demo of iongraph. Background As readers of this blog already know, SpiderMonkey has several tiers of execution for JavaScript and WebAssembly code. The highest tier is known as Ion, an optimizing SSA compiler that takes the most time to compile but produces the highest-quality output. Working with Ion frequently requires us to visualize and debug the SSA graph. Since 2011 we have used a tool for this purpose called iongraph , built by Sean Stangl. It is a simple Python script that takes a JSON dump of our compiler graphs and uses Graphviz to produce a PDF. It is perfectly adequate, and very much the status quo for compiler authors, but unfortunately the Graphviz output has many problems that make our work tedious and frustrating. The first problem is that the Graphviz output rarely bears any resemblance to the source code that produced it. Graphviz will place nodes wherever it feels will minimize error, resulting in a graph that snakes left and right seemingly at random. There is no visual intuition for how deeply nested a block of code is, nor is it easy to determine which blocks are inside or outside of loops. Consider the following function, and its Graphviz graph: function foo ( n ) { let result = 0 ; for ( let i = 0 ; i < n ; i ++ ) { if ( !! ( i % 2 )) { result = 0x600DBEEF ; } else { result = 0xBADBEEF ; } } return result ; } Counterintuitively, the return appears before the two assignments in the body of the loop. Since this graph mirrors JavaScript control flow, we’d expect to see the return at the bottom. This problem only gets worse as graphs grow larger and more complex. The second, related problem is that Graphviz’s output is unstable. Small changes to the input can result in large changes to the output. As you page through the graphs of each pass within Ion, nodes will jump left and right, true and false branches will swap, loops will run up the right side instead of the left, and so on. This makes it very hard to understand the actual effect of any given pass. Consider the following before and after, and notice how the second graph is almost—but not quite—a mirror image of the first, despite very minimal changes to the graph’s structure: None of this felt right to me. Control flow graphs should be able to follow the structure of the program that produced them. After all, a control flow graph has many restrictions that a general-purpose tool would not be aware of: they have very few cycles, all of which are well-defined because they come from loops; furthermore, both JavaScript and WebAssembly have reducible control flow, meaning all loops have only one entry, and it is not possible to jump directly into the middle of a loop. This information could be used to our advantage. Beyond that, a static PDF is far from ideal when exploring complicated graphs. Finding the inputs or uses of a given instruction is a tedious and frustrating exercise, as is following arrows from block to block. Even just zooming in and out is difficult. I eventually concluded that we ought to just build an interactive tool to overcome these limitations. How hard could layout be? I had one false start with graph layout, with an algorithm that attempted to sort blocks into vertical “tracks”. This broke down quickly on a variety of programs and I was forced to go back to the drawing board—in fact, back to the source of the very tool I was trying to replace. The algorithm used by dot , the typical hierarchical layout mode for Graphviz, is known as the Sugiyama layout algorithm, from a 1981 paper by Sugiyama et al. As introduction, I found a short series of lectures that broke down the Sugiyama algorithm into 5 steps: Cycle breaking , where the direction of some edges are flipped in order to produce a DAG . Leveling , where vertices are assigned into horizontal layers according to their depth in the graph, and dummy vertices are added to any edge that crosses multiple layers. Crossing minimization , where vertices on a layer are reordered in order to minimize the number of edge crossings. Vertex positioning , where vertices are horizontally positioned in order to make the edges as straight as possible. Drawing , where the final graph is rendered to the screen. These steps struck me as surprisingly straightforward, and provided useful opportunities to insert our own knowledge of the problem: Cycle breaking would be trivial for us, since the only cycles in our data are loops, and loop backedges are explicitly labeled. We could simply ignore backedges when laying out the graph. Leveling would be straightforward, and could easily be modified to better mimic the source code. Specifically, any blocks coming after a loop in the source code could be artificially pushed down in the layout, solving the confusing early-exit problem. Permuting vertices to reduce edge crossings was actually just a bad idea, since our goal was stability from graph to graph. The true and false branches of a condition should always appear in the same order, for example, and a few edge crossings is a small price to pay for this stability. Since reducible control flow ensures that a program’s loops form a tree, vertex positioning could ensure that loops are always well-nested in the final graph. Taken all together, these simplifications resulted in a remarkably straightforward algorithm, with the initial implementation being just 1000 lines of JavaScript. (See this demo for what it looked like at the time.) It also proved to be very efficient, since it avoided the most computationally complex parts of the Sugiyama algorithm. iongraph from start to finish We will now go through the entire iongraph layout algorithm. Each section contains explanatory diagrams, in which rectangles are basic blocks and circles are dummy nodes. Loop header blocks (the single entry point to each loop) are additionally colored green. Be aware that the block positions in these diagrams are not representative of the actual computed layout position at each point in the process. For example, vertical positions are not calculated until the very end, but it would be hard to communicate what the algorithm was doing if all blocks were drawn on a single line! Step 1: Layering We first sort the basic blocks into horizontal tracks called “layers”. This is very simple; we just start at layer 0 and recursively walk the graph, incrementing the layer number as we go. As we go, we track the “height” of each loop, not in pixels, but in layers. We also take this opportunity to vertically position nodes “inside” and “outside” of loops. Whenever we see an edge that exits a loop, we defer the layering of the destination block until we are done layering the loop contents, at which point we know the loop’s height. A note on implementation: nodes are visited multiple times throughout the process, not just once. This can produce a quadratic explosion for large graphs, but I find that an early-out is sufficient to avoid this problem in practice. The animation below shows the layering algorithm in action. Notice how the final block in the graph is visited twice, once after each loop that branches to it, and in each case, the block is deferred until the entire loop has been layered, rather than processed immediately after its predecessor block. The final position of the block is below the entirety of both loops, rather than directly below one of its predecessors as Graphviz would do. (Remember, horizontal and vertical positions have not yet been computed; the positions of the blocks in this diagram are hardcoded for demonstration purposes.) Implementation pseudocode /*CODEBLOCK=layering*/ function layerBlock ( block , layer = 0 ) { // Omitted for clarity: special handling of our "backedge blocks" // Early out if the block would not be updated if ( layer <= block . layer ) { return ; } // Update the layer of the current block block . layer = Math . max ( block . layer , layer ); // Update the heights of all loops containing the current block let header = block . loopHeader ; while ( header ) { header . loopHeight = Math . max ( header . loopHeight , block . layer - header . layer + 1 ); header = header . parentLoopHeader ; } // Recursively layer successors for ( const succ of block . successors ) { if ( succ . loopDepth < block . loopDepth ) { // Outgoing edges from the current loop will be layered later block . loopHeader . outgoingEdges . push ( succ ); } else { layerBlock ( succ , layer + 1 ); } } // Layer any outgoing edges only after the contents of the loop have // been pro
